HSE COMMUNITY NUTRITION & DIETETIC SERVICE
CARE GUIDELINES for the MANAGEMENT of
TYPE 2 DIABETES

Developed by a Working Group of HSE Community Dietitians

October 2020 – Version 3

This document (October 2020 – Version 3) was developed by HSE Community Diabetes
Dietitians during 2019 - 2020 to support their clinical practice. It will be updated by the
group as new evidence emerges.

Please contact the local Community Nutrition & Dietetic Service for the latest version.

Review Date: October 2021

2019-2020 Guidelines Working Group of Integrated Care Programme (ICP) Diabetes Community Dietitians

CHO 1 Marie Boyce, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 1 Pamela Cartwright, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 2 Dearbhla McGing, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 2 Katriona Kilkelly, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 3 Yvonne Kozarov, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 3 Tonya O’ Neill, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 4 Dr. Ciara McGowan, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 4 Annemarie O’ Connor, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 5 Mary O’ Sullivan, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 6 Celine Honohan, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 6 Mary T. O’ Loughlin, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 7 Laura McNamara, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 7 Michelle Carey, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 8 Olive Tully, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 8 Orla Brady, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 9 Aoife Ward, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
CHO 9 Orlaith Burkett, ICP Snr. Diabetes Dietitian
National Dr. Karen Harrington, National Clinical Specialist Dietitian (Diabetes)

Co-ordinated by the National Diabetes Clinical/Weight Management Working Group of ICP Community Diabetes Dietitians:
Orlaith Burkett, Dr. Karen Harrington, Katriona Kilkelly, Dearbhla McGing, Aoife Ward.

Leads: Dr. Karen Harrington & Dearbhla McGing.

Acknowledgements
We would like to express our thanks to members of the Joint Working Group of HSE Community Dietitians who produced the
original “National HSE Nutrition & Dietetic Care Plan for Type 2 Diabetes in Primary Care 2013” as part of their primary care roles.
Their work served as the foundation to these updated Guidelines . The original document served as an important reference
document for Dietitians in Ireland. We would like to thank Community D ietitians across the 9 Community Health Organisations
who participated in the consultation process and provided invaluable feedback . In particular we would like to thank Ciara Heverin,
Senior Diabetes Dietitian, Sarah McEvoy, Senior Community Diabetes Dietitian and Sally –Ann McLaughlin, Senior Community
Dietitian for their specialist knowledge. We would like to acknowledge the HSE ICP Diabetes Nurse Specialists and the INDI
Diabetes Interest Group Dietitians who also participated in the consultation process. Thank you to the HSE National Clinical
Programme for Diabetes for its endorsement. We would like to thank the following for their assistance with specific sections:

Healthcare Professional Care Plan Section
Margaret Humphreys, National Clinical Specialist Dietian/National SPE lead Support, Guidance, Resources

Ceara Clearly, Dental Hygienist, Ballyfermot PCC Dental care
Anne-Marie Cleere, Integrated Care C NS in Diabetes, CHO3 Medicines
Hilary Devine, Clinical Specialist Dietitian, National Maternity Hospital Pregnancy/Pre-pregnancy planning
Ciara Heverin, Snr. Diabetes Dietitian, CHO2 Dietary recommendations (fish oil)
HSE Live Manager, Geraldine Charman & team members Entitlements, support S MES course registration
Maternity Dietitians Ireland 2019 leaflet to support pre -pregnancy planning
Maternity Dietitia ns Ireland: Sinead Curran, Catherine Chambers Diet recommendation (Fish intake in pre gnancy/
Breast-feeding women)
Maura McKenna, Integrated Care CNS in Diabetes, South Tipperary, CHO5 Illness
Siobhan Meehan, Integrated Care CNS in Diabetes, CHO8 Blood Glucose Monitoring Best Practice Guidelines
Dorothy Moore, Integrated Care CNS in Diabetes , Carlow Kilkenny, CHO 5 Illness
Dr. Muriel Pate, Medication Safety Specialist Pharmacist, HSE My Medicines Campaign (HSE, 2019)
Podiatrists DSC/DW area - Caoimhe Joyce Hearne and Lucy Conway Entitlements re foot care
Podiatrists: Angela Ferris and Michael Cassidy Possible complications
Louisa Power, MPSI, Chief II Pharmacist - Pharmacy Services, Limerick Hypo treatments & LTI scheme, Fish oils.
Edel Russell, Senior Dietitian Cavan Monaghan NCPM
Suzanne Seery, Lead Dietitian, CROĺ Dietary recommendations (Fat, fish and fish oils)
Oonagh Smith, Clinical Specialist Dietitian (Renals) & Chair of the INDI RIG
& members of the INDI RIG CKD
Helen Twamley, Integrated Care CNS in Diabetes. CHO9 Possible complications

October 2020 – Version 3

CONTENTS PAGE

INTRODUCTION 2

PHILOSOPHY OF CARE 3

AIMS & OBJECTIVES 4

NUTRITION CARE PROCESS FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES 5

APPENDICES OF EVIDENCE (LIST) 7

SUPPORT FOLDERS TO THE APPENDICES OF EVIDENCE (LIST) - AVAILABLE ON THE DSME SHARED DRIVES 8

RESOURCES 69

REFERENCES 69

INTRODUCTION

The 2013 Community Nutrition and Dietetic Service careplan for Type 2 Diabetes is updated in line with national and international
evidence and best practice. It has been developed by a working group of Integrated care programme (ICP) Community Dietitians for
Diabetes in Primary Care, with many new topics added to meet the Dietitian role in diabetes care. The HSE Model of Integrated care
for people with type 2 diabetes (2018) outlines current recommendations of care and relevant information has been integr ated into
this document.

The guidelines are
 presented in the context of the Nutrition Care Process ‘Nutrition Assessment Structure Checklist’
 supported with Evidence on relevant topics presented in Appendices.
 supported with Support folders which contain additional information referred to in the Appendices. Available on the DSME
shared drives.
 summarised in a separate Summary document to share high level updates since 2013.

The guidelines and further information provided (i.e. website addresses, contact details) are correct as of January 2020 . Please
inform the working group of any amendment required.

 Advice re website addresses : The HSE Communications team is in the process of updating all HSE website information
during 2020. Please inform the working group of any changes observed.
 Resources and educational aids to assist delivery of services are being updated in phase 2 of this project.

A major development in the delivery of diabetes care to peopl e with diabetes, since 2013 guidelines , is the use of language when
describing people (not diabetics) and their experience with their care (no longer referring to adherence/compliance). See Ap pendix
on Language and the supporting folder on Language for further guidance.

A philosophy of care has been defined in the provision of dietetic care and diabetes education to people with diabet es and the ir
families or carers (see page 3).

The role of the person with diabetes (and their family) as leaders in their own care is now well recognised in national and
international recommendations.

The challenge for health care professionals is to not only keep up -to date with current treatment/management evidence but to
recognise the key role and in fluence of one's interpersonal skills, attitudes to and with people, and one’s language used with people
and talking about people and their current care.

Overview of Type 2 Diabetes
Diabetes is recognised as a pre -mature cause of death and ill health. People living with diabetes are at risk of developing a number
of serious and life -threatening complications, leading to an increased need for medical care, a reduced quality of life, and undue
stress on families. Diabetes and its complications, if not we ll managed, can lead to frequent hospital admissions and premature
death (IDF, 2019). Diabetes is associated with substantial cost burden for the person with diabetes, their families and for the
economy. Additional costs for diabetes i n Ireland are estimated as approx. €89million annually, with 2/3 of costs associated with
hospital admissions (O’Neill et al, 2018). With prompt and accurate diagnosis and access to appropriate care, diabetes can be
managed and its complications prevented. Furthermore, type 2 diabetes can often be prevented and there is compelling evidence to
suggest it can, in some circumstances, be reversed (IDF, 2019).

The definition of Type 2 Diabetes as a chronic progressive illness is currently challenged . The understanding of type 2 diabetes,
gained through the initial research and recent DIRECT study in primary care, has offered people HOPE in how they approach
management and treatment. A person’s role in their unique treatment plan is crucial.

In Ireland, there are estimates of ¼ million people with diabetes although there is not currently a national diabetes register. The
National Clin ical Programme for Diabetes prioritised diabetes care development and a register is seen as a national requirement.
The HSE Integrated Care Programme for the Prevention and Treatment of Chronic Disease considers diabetes services a priority. In
2009 the HSE published a Review of Diabetes Structured Education.
 A Clinical Specialist Dietitian (Diabetes) commenced work nationally with the national clinical programme for diabetes in 2015.
 National guidelines were produced to support delivery of care by diabetes health care professionals in 2016 (2016 ICGP) and the
HSE Model of Integrated care for patients with Type 2 Diabetes was published in 2018.
 Services in primary care for diabetes have expanded since 2016 with placement of community podiatrists, integrated care
diabetes specialist nurses and 19 Integrated care Community Dietitian posts in 2017/2018.
 The HSE launched the GP cycle of care for Diabetes in 2015, supporting GMS clients to receive 2 diabetes appointments in
primary care with their GP. An updated national GP contract inviting GPs to participate in the Chronic Disease Management
Programme commenced in Jan 2020 for GMS/GPVC. Type 2 Diabetes is included and phase 1 addresses those over 75years . In
2020 further development of diabetes services is facilitated through Slá intecare.

PHILOSOPHY OF CARE

A philosophy of care has been defined in the provision of dietetic care and diabetes education to people with diabetes and the ir
families or carers (see below).

A philosophy is both a viewpoint (a perspective of how things are) and a system of values (a perspective of how th ings should be),
(Funnell et al 1991).

Philosophy is important because it influences our professional behaviours, attitudes, satisfaction and effectiveness (Anderso n,
1987). Our philosophy of care outlines the goals and values that underpin the care we deliver & how we deliver it.

A defined philosophy underpins the recommended 4 quality standards for diabetes patient education programmes or structured
patient education courses (SPE) ( i.e. a structured written Curriculum, Trained educators, Quality assurance and Audit). (Diabetes UK
& DH 2005, HSE 2009), now being referred to as Self Management Education and Support (SMES).

The underlying guiding philosophy for dietetic care for people with type 2 diabetes is:
1. HSE Values

2. Person Centred Care (i.e. Patient-Centred Model of Care)

3. The Empowerment Approach to Care

4. The Principles of Adult Learning (i.e. Andragogy), patient education and group facilitation

5. Theories of Behaviour Change

6. Integration of psychosocial care to address disease burden and convey hope

7. The health literacy, numeracy literacy and cultural needs of the Irish population

8. Attention to language used in diabetes care, use of recommended language and awareness of impact

9. Integration of the person & their family

These elements guide what we deliver & how we deliver and enable us to articulate the value of our services (1 -1 and group) to our
clients, colleagues and those unfamiliar with the role of diabetes educators and DSME.

Our philosophy of care for people with/at risk of diabetes is that dietitians deliver person centred and person driven care.

The dietitian has a unique relationship with their clients, respecting that the person has 98% control over their care (Anderson &
Funnell, 2002).

The dietitian invites a person’s spouse, families, and carers to attend appointments and courses to create a positive support
network that aims to help the person in their efforts to self-manage diabetes.

AIMS & OBJECTIVES
AIMS OF DIETETIC CARE:
1. To devise and deliver nutrition and dietetic care, based on current evidence and best practice, which helps the
individual and their families/carers to make and maintain lifestyle changes (i.e. behaviour changes) that are best
suited to their particular needs, expectations, capabilities, preferences and value s, as recommended in the HSE
Model of Integrated care for patients with Type 2 Diabetes.
2. To offer all people with type 2 diabetes access to a structured education package where they will receive
appropriate dietary and clinical care advice. People not suitable for group education should be offered one to one
education with a Dietitian.
3. To facilitate people’s self-management i.e. to support people with type 2 diabetes to recognise their essential and
active role in their own diabetes care.
4. To collaborate with people to achieve their individual recommended health result targets , recognising that a key
guiding principle of current diabetes care is that one size does not fit all and all care is individualised.
5. To support delivery of integrated diabetes care to people and their families as part of a collaborative multi -disciplinary
diabetes care team (e.g. GP, PN, DNS, Podiatrist, Pharmacist, etc).

OBJECTIVES OF DIETETIC CARE:
 To support the person being informed that type 2 diabetes is a serious BUT treatable condition and to convey HOPE
that it is a condition that can be very well treated and for some reversed to a ‘state of remission’.
 To educate the person with diabetes by providing information and advice (i.e. knowledge) , to support them gaining
awareness of their current diabetes management, the recommended diet and lifestyle advice for type 2 diabetes
and recommended general diabetes education.
 Through use of behaviour change skills and strategies (i.e. BCT training), provide the person with behavioural
strategies to support their diabetes self -management .
 To empower the person to apply the principles of a healthy eating plan for diabetes and CVD risk reduction.
 To empower the person to become more physically active, to become aware of their sedentary behaviour
(sitting/lying time) and to consider reducing same to support their diabetes care and overall health care.
 To empower the person to achieve and maintain a healthier body weight as appropriate & be informed of evidence
of supporting diabetes remission .
 To empower the person to develop the skills, knowledge and confidence to self-manage their diabetes. People with
diabetes should receive diabetes self-management education when their diabetes is diagnosed and as needed
thereafter with 4 time points recommended by the ADA (See Appendix on Diabetes Self-Management).
 To improve the person’s overall health and diabetes management through promotion of healthy lifestyle choices
that would support other cardiovascular risk factor reduction (e.g. healthier body weight, improved physical activity,
smoking cessation, healthy alcohol intake and stress management). Focus on behaviours, as they lead to better
health results.
 To explore medicine taking with the person and empower them to consider challenges and discuss with
GP/pharmacist/PN/DNS further as needed.
 To support the person to achieve diabetes health results such as blood glucose levels, HbA1c levels, blood
pressure readings, blood lipid levels and renal function tests (i.e. urine albumin:creatinine ratio (ACR) and eGFR ) in
line with the targets recommended by their lead diabetes health care professional (e.g. GP or consultant) or national
guidelines.
 To ensure the nutritional adequacy and balance of the diet (e.g. Vitamin D, prevention of anaemia, malnutrition,
wound healing).
 To support prevention, delay, detection and treatment of acute and chronic complications and maintain quality of
life through supporting general diabetes education (e.g. discussing annual diabetic renal screening tests, care of the
feet, advice to recheck diabetes health results (i.e. repeat ACR, BP, etc.) & consider associated psychosocial needs.
 To address individual needs taking into consideration personal/cultural preferences and lifestyle, and respecting
wishes and willingness to change.
 To support the person to recognise that caring for diabetes can be demanding sometimes and can result in times
where it is difficult to cope e.g. diabetes distress, more severe diabetes burnout or indeed affect our mental health
more seriously causing depr ession. To support the person to learn coping skills .
 To support the person to recognise and explore the role of creating a supportive environment to help maintain
healthy lifestyle choices and optimal diabetes care, through the support of health care professionals,
family/carers/friends and social and peer supports.

These guidelines support Community Dietitians in the delivery of dietetic care and DSME to people with diabetes and
their families , in line with the recommendations of HSE Model of Integrated Care for the management of people with
type 2 diabetes . The care delivered and translation of this guidance into practical advice, education and support to people
and their families , will be guided by the clinical judgement of the dietitian to meet the individual needs of every client
and their individual circumstances.

Nutrition Care Process for Type 2 Diabetes – adapted nutrition assessment structure checklist for medical and dietetic notes
Follow local Policies, Procedures and Guidelines when providing care and obtaining consent.

1.Medical Tests and Procedures
New assessment:
 Note the date of and reason for referral, medical diagnosis: newly diagnosed or existing T2DM with +/ - CKD disease, uncomplicated/complicated for
primary care only or joint primary & secondary care. Note other medical condition s e.g. hypertension, heart disease, coeliac disease, cancer, arthritis,
etc.
Psychosocial care Investigations/observations/tests: Document any diagnoses of mental health/psychological disorders e.g. anxiety, depression,
diabetes distress, disordered eating & if receiving support for same. Refer to Psychosocial Care Appendix
 Summarise other investigations/observations/tests if relevant (as per patient group) to dietetic intervention e.g., symptoms prior diagnosis, US for
investigation of Fatty liver, recent retinal screen/foot check, Blood Pressure , attendance at appointments (acute service, primary care (GP, DNS, PN).
 Identify patient group e.g. Older Adults, Women of child bearing age & tailor screening and advice accordingly. Refer to Older Adults & Pre-Pregnancy
Planning & Pregnancy and Type 2 Diabetes Appendices.
 Include relevant MDT recommendations: e.g. PN/DNS & when next review is, physiotherapy e.g. guidance on suitable exercises.
Review assessment:
 Comment on date of review assessment e.g. assessment 2 of 3 for 2019/SPE (link it to Model of Integrated Care 2018) or as per local CNDS
appointments guidelines/PPGs.
 Review Behavioural and/or Psychosocial care investigations/observations/tests as listed above & appendices.
 Comment on relevant information/updates since last assessment e.g. hospital visits, DNS vis its, GP/PN visits, retinal or foot screening , investigations,
Blood pressure.
2. Biochemistry
New assessment:
 Review and note relevant biochemistry as indicated in the Clinical Targets table (see Appendix) - HbA1c, Blood Glucose , Lipid profile, Urine
albumin: creatinine ratio if available. Note actual result and date taken. Comment on change since last test i.e. normal result or if out of target, note
increase/decrease.
 Note if check-up appointment due for tests - advise on tests that require check ing with GP/PN as appropriate e.g. ACR, repeat , lipid profile.
 When assessing blood glucose , interpret in the context of diabetes medicine s and determine if using a blood glucose monitor, frequency of
checking, timing of testing, recording of results, if they have been advised on blood glucose target levels. (See BGM and Clinical Targets
Appendix) .
 Check person’s awareness and knowledge of diabetes health results and if advised on individual targets. Re Older Adults and supporting women of
child-bearing age with pre-pregnancy planning and pregnancy, see Appendices.
 Provide available results in written record such as the My Diabetes Health Result Form as part of the PLAN section 8 and use Diabetes
Passport as per local hospital care pathway:
 Check and note renal tests completed to date (serum creatinine, eGFR calculation) and translate to CKD stage. Discuss with GP as required
i.e. results suggestive of CKD and not stated in referral or shared by person with diabetes .
 Check and note liver function tests and note same.
 If a woman of child -bearing age, consider if appropriate to share targets for non -pregnant women are different to pregnant women, who will
require their care reviewed by their care team to support their care during pregnancy. See Appendix pre-pregnancy planning & pregnancy.
Review Assessment:
 Comment on relevant results as per recommended Clinical Targets e.g. elevated/decreased HbA1c since last review, declining renal
function. Document date of recent bloods, GP or hospital request.
 Cross reference with relevant medicines if appropriat e e.g. impact of last medicine on biochemistry.
3.Relevant Medicines
New & Review Assessment:
 Include all relevant prescribed Medicines and electrolyte supplementation (can cross-reference with biochemistry). See Appendix.
 If there are no medicines of dietetic relevance, record ‘Nil of dietetic relevance”.
 Document any change(s) of dietetic relevance. If no change(s) document ‘No change(s) of dietetic relevance’.
 Cross -reference with relevant biochemistry if appr opriate e.g. diabetes, hyperlipid aemia and hypertension medicines. Interpret and review
HbA1c and blood glucose self-monitoring results together a nd consider diabetes medicines effects. and influences as appropriate e.g. on
insulin, sulp honylureas, timing of medicines .
 Identify any med icine that may be contribute to hypoglycaemia and enquire if any episodes of same. Liaise with GP, PN or DNS to discuss as
appropriate.
 Consider medicine issues of relevance which will also support review of HbA1c and blood gluc ose tests - timing of medicine s, experience taking (e.g.
polypharmacy, injections), challenges, storage issues, pharmacy support.
4.Nutrition Focused physical findings
New Assessment:
 Appetite, bowels, Nausea and vomiting. * for additional information refer to Medicines Appendix
 Fluid Balance –visual assessment of feet/legs for fluid retention. Weight changes. Diuretic pprescription..
 Skin- slow healing wounds may be an indicator of poor glycaemic control. Diabetic Foot Ulcer presence/history.
 Presence of poor glycaemic control symptoms e.g. polydypsia, nocturia, increased thirst/tiredness
 Possible observations could include (taken from Nutritional Diagnosis catalogue): N egative body language, e.g., frowning, lack of eye contact, fidgeting,
defensive posture, crying (Note: body language varies by culture)
Review Assessment: Document any changes of dietetic relevance since initial consult, if any.
5.Anthropometric Measurements, Nutrition Requirements
New Assessment:
 As relevant: h eight, weight, BMI, waist circumference, % weight change over time (include reasons, if applicable), ulna length , MUAC, muscle and
subcutaneous fat wasting, abdominal circumference, body surface area, fat mass, % body fat/fat free mass/body water.

 Check for any fluid retention and estimate weight adjustment accordingly
 Nutritional requirements: Indicate predictive eq uations used for energy and protein requirements by name, e.g. Henry Oxford or by full equation, e.g.
10.2(64) + 572. Indicate use of food pyramid and portion sizes in estimating requirements . Estimate energy, protein, lipid/fat, carbohydrate, fluid,
micronutrient, non -nutrient (e.g. fibre/caffeine) requirements if relevant. Refer to date of last estimated nutritional requirements if not re -estimating
requirements. Based on information collected in relation to activity levels include an activity factor and/or stress factors as appropriate based on clinical
condition. Include adjustments as necessary for any recommended weight loss/gain
Review Assessment:
 If appropriate, weigh patient and measure waist circumference and compare weight, waist circumference and BMI to previous measures and reassess
targets.
6.Food & Nutrition Related History
New assessment:
 Behavioural Investigations/observations/tests
1. Identify person’s “perception of diagnosis of diabetes”, their thoughts on this referral & how the person envisages the Dietitian supporting them.
2. Identify their expectations with regard to weight loss/gain & other treatments.
3. Use Interpersonal skills & tools to assess willingness/ability to make diet & lifestyle changes e.g. Importance & Confidence, Reasons for Change,
Pros and Cons of Change, Ambivalence Grid, readiness, potential barriers to change, goal setting, problem solving, self -monitoring & rewards. Explore
importance & build confidence as needed.
 Psychosocial care Investigations/observations/tests: Consider person’s social support, social situation. See Psychosocial care Appendix.

Dietary Intake: example: N/A / 24hr recall / Typical Day / Food Diary/ Food Pyramid/ Food Frequency Questionnaire/ Carbohydrate foods & portions, Other
 Refer to Dietary recommendations for adults with Type 2 Diabetes Appendix. Cooking skills/food shopping ability. Functional capabilities preventing
food procurement or preparation.
 Mealtime routine – regular meals/skipping meals, work hours/days, number of meals and snacks, social eating occasions, alcohol intake, othe r.
 Non-prescribed supplements, vitamins, minerals, or complementary/alternative medicines. If taken for diabetes control explore if rationale.
 Behaviour, attitudes to food, readiness to change and motivation – Refer to Behaviour Change Appendix
 Alcohol – refer to Alcohol Appendix
 Smoking – refer to Smoking & Smoking services Appendix
 Identify activity patterns – assess the person’s physical activity level through open-ended questions, use activity diaries and pedometers. Refer to
Physical Activity/Sitting Time Appendix.
Review Assessment:
Invite feedback on progress since initial consult; assess understanding of goals set – what went well/to improve on
Cover additional topics around diet and diabetes as appropriate since initial consult

7.Nutritional Diagnosis/Goal and Summary of Nutritional Issues
Problem - Aetiology - Signs and Symptoms (specific and evidenced in 1-6).

8.Plan – new and review assessment
The nutrition care PLAN should include the headings below (guide):
These areas will be addressed during the dietetic care offered (group/1-1), discussing and providing written information as deemed appropriate.
 Care and advice will be based on an individual’s diagnosis (Section 7) of diabetes and other co -existing conditions/needs. Discuss Type 2 Diabetes as a
serious but treatable condition, the key role of the person themselves (i.e. self -care), the potential t o prevent and possibly support remission (see
Appendix). See Appendices re obesity/overweight/weight management, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, CKD, older adults, pregnancy, minority
ethnic groups.
 Nutrition education / Dietary recommendations for adults with Type 2 Diabetes (see Appendix): provided according to the needs identified in section
6. Negotiate dietary goals, as appropriate and at review, negotiate new goals, when previous goals have been successful.
 Food and nutrient delivery: oral sip feeds, supplements if required or not required i.e. micronutrients, fish oil supplements, plant sterols/stanols.
 Nutrition counselling: behaviour change skills and strategies and counselling techniques used e.g. exploring importance, confidence , readiness and
exploring ambivalence as needed, goal setting, problem solving, self-monitoring, social support.
 Co-ordination of nutrition care: special diet orders, liaising with MDT staff. Link with other MDT as required (i.e. GP, PN, DNS, family/carers).
 Diabetes Self-Management Education and Support (see Appendix): Discuss the following to support the person to develop the knowledge, skills and
confidence to self-manage:
o Courses - Recommend completion of locally available diabetes self-management course as part of treatment. Refer if not attended to d ate. Offer
family member, carer or friend to attend for support. Offer 1-1 if cannot attend or on course waiting list.
o My diabetes health results (see Appendix Clinical Targets)
o Entitlements & check-ups (see Appendix)
o Lifestyle treatment for Type 2 Diabetes - Physical Activity, Smoking, Alcohol, Sleep (see Appendices).
o Medicines (see Appendix)
o Psychosocial care & support (see Appendix)
o Other key diabetes education topics. Blood Glucose Monitor ing, Hypoglycaemia & Driving Guidance, Illness/sick day guidance,
Holidays/travel – see Appendices.
o Management of co -existing complications and associated psychosocial issues through discussion on entitlements/services as appropriate (e.g.
DRS, foot checks, dentists, GP check-ups). See Appendix Complications of Diabetes.
 Planned follow-up:
o Discuss care in terms of service recommended i.e. group diabetes course, 1-1, both, block of care.
o Discuss appointments/referrals recommended e.g. GP/DNS appointment, follow-up tests/checks (e.g. ACR), DRS, foot check, psychosocial care
services/supports, pharmacy support, physical activity support, smoking cessation support.
o Consider discussion required with GP in GP feedback letter or by phone/meeting regarding care e.g. the person’s knowledge of their diagnosis,
repeat ACR, clarification regarding CKD status and person’s knowledge re same, concerns re any aspect of care.

Note: This NCPM document will be continually revised with the guidance of local and National NCPM representatives.

APPENDICES OF EVIDENCE
1 Dietary recommendations for adults with Type 2 Diabetes 10
Diet –NEW 10
Dietary Pattern – NEW 10
Energy 10
Carbohydrate 10
GI – NEW 11
Sucrose 11
Fructose – NEW 11
Fruit –NEW 11
Yogurt –NEW 11
Fizzy Drinks – NEW 12
Sweeteners 12
Diabetic Foods 12
Fibre 12
Protein 13
Red Meat and Processed - NEW 13
Fat 13
Saturated Fat, MUFA, PUFA, Trans Fat 14
Plant Sterols & Stanols 14
Fish & Oily Fish 15
Fish oil supplements 16
Micronutrients 16
Salt/Sodium 16
Further information on dietary recommendations; 17
Prompts to support dietary recommendations discussion 17
2 Alcohol 18
3 Behaviour Change 19
4 Blood Glucose Monitoring –NEW 21
5 Chronic Kidney Disease 25
6 Clinical Targets - for ADULTS and for OLDER ADULTS 28 & 31
7 Complications of Diabetes - NEW 32
8 Diabetes Self-Management Education and Support – NEW 36
Driving Guidance – see 11.Hypoglycaemia Appendix – NEW 46
9 Entitlements – NEW 39
Food labelling – NEW – see Support folder
10 Hypertension and Hyperlipidaemia 43
11 Hypoglycaemia, including Driving Guidance 44
12 Illness/sick day guidance – NEW 47
13 Language – NEW 48
14 Medicines - NEW 49
15 Minority Ethnic Groups - NEW 50
16 Obesity/Overweight/Weight Management including Diabetes Remission (NEW) 51
17 Older Adults and Diabetes – NEW 54
18 Physical Activity 59
19 Pre-pregnancy planning & Pregnancy for women of child-bearing age – NEW 60
20 Psychosocial Care and Support – including stress – NEW 61
21 Sleep – NEW 65
22 Smoking – Training for Health care professionals – NEW 65
23 Smoking and Smoking Services 66
24 Training and Support for Dietitians – NEW 67
25 Travel Guidance & Holidays – NEW 68

SUPPORT FOLDERS TO THE APPENDICES OF EVIDENCE (SEE DSME SHARED DRIVES)
The following folders support the relevant Appendix with information to support the dietitian or the person with diabetes.
Support
Folder on
Supporting Information
Alcohol Drinkaware – Alcohol and the body (Poster)
Blood Glucose
Monitoring
Guide to Blood Glucose Testing (HSE) – Leaflet
References:
Glycaemic Targets for Adults (ADA 2019)
Type 2 Diabetes Test Strips Q&A for patients (2016)
Type 2 Diabetes Test Strips Reimbursement Q&A for healthcare professionals (2016)
Report on self-monitoring of blood glucose 2014, 2016 (HSE)
Best Practice Guidelines Folder :
-Best Practice Guidelines for health care professionals when educating patients & carers to self -test capillary
blood glucose (2017)
- Best Practice Guidelines for health care professionals when monitoring capillary blood glucose in health care
settings (acute & long-term) (2017)
Free Style Libre 2019
Media Release . Free style libre update DI (June 2009)
User Experience of Flash Glucose Monitoring on Daily Life Experiences (June 2019)
Tyndall et al 2019 – Paper on marked improvement in HbA1c in type 1 diabetes
CKD Guide to NCP in CKD Stage 1-3A INDI Renal Interest Group (2018)
RIG stages of dietary intervention oct19 (INDI Renal Interest Group)
Clinical
Targets
My Diabetes Health Results sept19 – form for use with clients (2019)
My Diabetes Health Results with name and dob – can support leaving with GP (2019)
Diabetes cycle of care 2015 Folder of reference info
My Diabetes Health Result Form Folder of reference info
Type 2 Diabetes Clinical Targets Evidence – word review
Diabetes
SMES
Diabetes SMES Alog of care and Action Steps (Powers et al, 2015 ADA, AADE, AND)
Diet ADA May 2019 - Nutrition Therapy for Adults with Diabetes or Prediabetes: A Consensus Report
Entitlements Diabetic Retina Screen Folder:
About eye drops
Consent info
DRS and Dietitians update CHO4
DRS consent form for health care professionals
Paper on diet and eye health
LTI: Centralisation of the LTI letter (2019)
Food labelling Food labelling Appendix
Hypos and
Driving
Diabetes and Driving Leaflet 2017
Guidance on Hypos for clients from Discover Diabetes – Type 2 being prepared into resource for 1-1/SPE.
Glucotabs and Glucojuice 2019 rebranding info
Dietitian reference documents: 1) Fizzy drink aug19; 2) Glucose Tablets aug19
Medical Fitness to Drive Guidelines Aug 2019 (updated from April 2019) - RSA
Language Language table for reference and 3 reference papers – Australia, NHS UK and ADA.
Medicines Appendix 1 – Glucose lowering medications Appendix 2 – Characteristics of medications
Appendix 3 – My Medicine List (HSE, 2019) Appendix 4 – 5 moments for medication safety (WHO)
Appendix 5 - Fish oil guidance from pharmacists on interaction with medication
Appendix 6 - Know, Check Ask Medication Safety Campaign, Sept. 2019
Appendix 7 – Key messages for people promoting Know, Check, Ask
Note: The My Medicine List (HSE) leaflet has been adapted adding guidance on LTIs and awareness of hypo risk – it
will be made available in this folder when ready.
Pregnancy Pre-pregnancy planning and diabetes leaflet – 2019
Pre-pregnancy planning and diabetes DSME Curriculum content 2019
HSE staff communication – Pregnancy, Alcohol & FASD – Sept 2019
Psychosocial
care &
support
2019 – Evidence review for guidelines - Psychosocial care and support for diabetes
Diabetes UK/Australia Handbook Psychosocial care 2019 – Diabetes and Emotional Health – a practical guide for
healthcare professionals supporting adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes
Textbooks – The art of empowerment; 101 Tips behaviour change book
Self-management support directory CHO4 jul19 – HSE communication
Resources HSE Diabetes patient resources – updated Sept. 2020
How to register on healthpromotion.ie
Smoking Resource to support health care professionals in consult – 30 second stop smoking advice
HSE Quit team and national no smoking tips mar19

APPENDICES OF EVIDENCE

1. DIETARY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADULTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES
The dietary recommendations are supported with guidance on FOOD LABELLING – see support folder on food labelling.
DIET/NUTRIENT
ADVICE
RECOMMENDATION
DIET There is no single ideal dietary distribution of calories among carbohydrates, fats, and proteins for people
with diabetes; therefore, meal plans should be individualised while keeping total calorie and metabolic
goals in mind. Emphasis should be on healthful eating patterns containing nutrient-dense foods, with less
focus on specific nutrients. (ADA, 2019)
DIETARY PATTERN A variety of eating patterns are acceptabl e for the management of type 2 d iabetes (ADA, 2019). Until the
evidence surrounding comparat ive benefits of different eating patterns in specific individuals strengthens,
healthcare providers should focus on the key factors that are common among the patterns: 1) emphasize
non-starchy vegetables, 2) minimize added sugars and refined grains, and 3) choose whole foods over highly
processed foods to the extent possible (ADA, 2019). Low-carbohydrate, low glycaemic index, and highprotein diets, and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet ALL improve glycaemic control ,
but the effect of the Mediterranean eating pattern appears to be the greatest. Three trials of a
Mediterranean eating pattern reported modest weight loss and improved glycaemic control, (ADA & EASD
2018). See FURTHER INFORMATION BELOW on Dietary Recom mendations for further information on the
components of the DASH and Mediterranean diets.
ENERGY Individual energy requirements can be calculated usin g the Henry Oxford equation and taking account of
Physical Activity Level or individualise based on stage of CKD as relevant (INDI, Nutrition Support reference
guide 2015).
For overweight or obese people with Type 2 Diabetes reducing energy intake to achieve weight loss should
be the primary nutritional management strategy (D iabetes UK 2018). Weight loss can be attained with
lifestyle programs that achieve a 500–750 kcal/day energy deficit (ADA 2019).
When provided by trained practitioners in medical care settings with close medical monitoring, short -term
(3-month) interventio ns that use very-low-calorie diets (defined as <800 kcal/day) and total meal
replacements (800 -1200kcal/day) may achieve greater short -term weight loss (10 –15%) than intensive
behavioural lifestyle interventions that typically achieve 5% weight loss, (ADA, 2019). These interventions are
not routinely offered in community settings at present.
In case of obesity and weight management in older adults with diabetes, please refer to the respective
recommendations in the Appendices for Obesity/weight management and Older Adults.
CARBOHYDRATE General Carbohydrate Guidance for Type 2 Diabetes
-The ideal proportion for macronutrients including carbohydrate is unclear. However monitoring
carbohydrate intake and considering the blood glucose response to dietary carbohydrate are key to
improving postprandial glucose control (ADA, 2019).
No specific ideal proportion of macronutrients, including carbohydrates, is advised (Di abetes UK 2018).

-Carbohydrate intake should consist of nutrient-dense carbohydrates including vegetables, fruits, legumes,
whole grains and low fat dairy products. The quality of carbohydrates selected, ideally rich in dietary fibre,
vitamins and mineral s and low in added sugars, fat and salt should be addressed (ADA 2019). Avoidance of
sugar-sweetened drinks and fruit juices , as well as foods with added sugars , should be advised to control
glycaemia, weight and reduce cardiovascular risk and risk of NAFLD (ADA, 2019).

Low carbohydrate diets for Type 2 Diabetes
-Low carbohydrate diets (50 -130g) can be effective in the short term (<12months) to reduce weight,
improve glycaemic control, and reduce CVD risk in T2DM (BDA 2018). More research is required to
determine the long term effect of low carbohydrate diets and to agree on what amount of dietary
carbohydrate constitutes a low carbohydrate diet as there is currently no agreed definition . When dietary
carbohydrate is restricted there is a tendency to increase other macronutrients. Individuals adhering to a
low carbohydrate diet should ensure their fat is provided from MUFA rich sources and not saturated fat.
-More research is required to assess the optimum dietary patterns to ensure both good glycaemic control
and to reduce cardiovascular risk.
-Reducing overall carbohydrate has shown to be effective to improve glycaemia in individuals with diabetes
and may be a viable option for those not meeting glycaemic targets or those requiring redu ctions in diabetes
medicines. (ADA 2019).
-At present, there is insufficient evidence that low carbohydrate diets are superior for weight loss in the long
term and it should be recognised that people on low carbohydrate diets will requi re additional diete tic
support. Because of concerns regarding the use of very low carbohydrate diets in people with CKD,
disordered eating patterns and pregnant women ; ADA guidelines sugge st further research is required (ADA
2019). In addition , careful consideration will nee d to be given to diabetes medicine prescriptions when
considering dietary carbohydrate reduction to reduce the risk of hypoglycaemia. More frequent monitoring

of blood glucose levels may be necessary initially. Liaise with GP / DNS re same as required.
GLYCAEMIC
INDEX
Replacing high GI foods with low GI alternatives has been associated with a small but significant
reduction in HbA1c levels in some studies but this reduction of 4 -6mmol/l was not seen in larger RCT
trials comparing low GI and standard diet . In addition , this reduction in HbA1c was not shown to be
independent of w eight loss (Diabetes UK 2018). The ADA concurs that there is no clear clinical benefit in
using either GI or Glycaemic Load (GL) in clinical practice. (ADA 2019).
Further informati on on the GI food lists is available at https://www.diabetes.org.uk/guide -todiabetes/enjoy -food/carbohydrates -and-diabetes/gly caemic-index-and-diabetes
SUCROSE

There are currently no specific sugar recommendations in diabetes management. People with T2DM should
be encouraged to reduce sugar intake in line with recommendations for the general population (Diabetes UK
2018).
The ADA recommend s that people with diabetes minimise intakes of refined carbohydrates and added
sugars and instead focus on including carbohydrates from vegetables, legumes, fruits, dairy and whole grains
(ADA 2019) . In addition , they advise against the inclu sion of sugar -sweetened drinks (including fruit juice)
and processed low fat or non -fat products with added sugars. In addition , NICE recommends that foods with
added sugars that may displace healthier more nutrient-dense foods should be avoided (NICE 2015).
FRUCTOSE The quality of evidence for the effects of fructose in diabetes is limited (Diabetes UK 2018).
Consuming naturally occur ring fructose i.e. from fruit/ honey is not more deleterious than other forms of
sugar unless intake exceeds approx. 12% . The quality of the evidence for the effects of fructose in Type 2
Diabetes is limited , with trials suggesting that the iso caloric exchange of fructose for other carbohydrate
does not significantly affect glucose or insulin levels (Diabetes UK 2018).
However, there is evidence that fructose may be a fac tor in increased serum and post prandial triglyceride
levels (Diabetes UK 2018). The ADA recommends that people with and a t risk of diabetes avoid sugar sweetened beverages including fruit juices , in order to c ontrol glycaemia and weight and reduce
cardiovascular risks and risk of fatty liver (ADA 2019).
FRUIT The guidelines recommend that the largest proportion of our diets should be made up of vegetables, salads
and fruit (5 -7 portions per day (FSAI 2019). There is much confusion about current guidance on fruit intake
for diabetes (e.g. grapes, strawberries, banana, dried fruit, fruit juices).
-Educate on current recommendations for health, versus knowledge needed for diabetes e.g. awareness of
carbohydrate intake from fruit portion size effects and effects of glycaemic intake and glycaemic load.
-Educate on the nutritional value of fruit in terms of fibre and micronutrients (e.g. daily Vitamin C needs).
-Educate on the difference between fruit in the form of whole fruits versus juice intake.

The table below gives examples of fruit portions = 15g carbohydrate
Fruit Portion
Apple 1 medium (160-175g)
Apricot 3 small
Banana 1 small (120g)
Grapes 17 (100g)
Juice 150mls
Melon 1 slice
Orange 1 medium
Raisins 2 tbsp.

YOGURTS

-There is much confusion about current guidance on yogurt intake for diabetes
-Educate on current recommendations for health, versus knowledge needed for diabetes e.g. awareness of
carbohydrate intake, added sugars, natural sugars and artificial sweeteners
-Educate on the nutritional value of yoghurt in terms of macro and micro -nutrients (e.g. daily Calcium
needs).
Resources: To support education on yog hurts – see Diabetes Ireland - Yoghurt smart 2016 or Diabetes UK
'Whats in your pot' resource
https://www.diabetes.ie/are-you-at-risk-free-diabetes-test/get-sugar-smart/yoghurts/
https://www.diabetes.org.uk/guide-to-diabetes/enjoy-food/eating-with-diabetes/diabetes-foodmyths/yogurts

FIZZY DRINKS -For those who consume sugar -sweetened beverages regularly, a low-calorie or non -nutritive sweetened
beverage may serve as a short -term replacement strategy and can be used (ICGP , 2016), but overall, people
are encouraged to decrease both sweetened and non -nutritive sweetened beverages and use other
alternatives, with an emphasis on water intake (ADA, 2018).
-Swapping sugar-sweetened beverages for artificially sweetened beverages such as sugar -free and low sugar
or diet squashes and fizzy drinks (ICGP , 2016) is likely to be beneficial for most individuals from a weight
management point of v iew (Diabetes UK, 2018). However, healthier drink options/alternatives should be
actively encouraged (e.g. , milk-based drinks) as these provide additional nutritional benefits that artifici ally
sweetened beverages do not (BDA, 2016).
-Sugar, sweets and sweetened beverages should be avoided (IDF , 2017). The consumption of sugar sweetened drinks should be minimised in children and adults (SACN, 2015).
SWEETENERS

Educate that they are non-essential yet they may have a potential role in trying to support a client in
reducing their total carbohydrate intake.

- The evidence -base shows that artificial sweeteners are considered safe to consume in the general
population with the exception of foods for infants and you ng children and are authorised and approved for
use by EFSA. From a dietetic perspective, artificial sweeteners may be included as part of a dietetic
intervention though recommendation should be given on a case-by-case basis (BDA, 2016; Diabetes UK,
2018).
-Consumers can safely enjoy a range of nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners when consumed as part of a
balanced, healthy diet and within acceptable daily intake levels as advised by the Scientific Committee on
Food (SCF) and since 2002 by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (INDI, 2016).
-The use of non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS) may have the potentia l to reduce overall calorie and
carbohydrate intake if substituted for caloric (sugar) sweeteners and wi thout compensation by intake of
additional calories from other food sources. While use of non-nutritive sweeteners does not appear to have
a significant effect on glycaemic control (D iabetes UK, 2018). Most systematic reviews and meta -analyses
show benefits for non -nutritive sweetener use in weight loss however, some research suggests an
association with weight gain.
Regulatory agencies set acceptable daily intake levels (ADI) for each non-nutritive sweetener, defined as the
amount that can be safely consumed over a person’s lifetime (ADA , 2018). For example, ADI aspartame is
40mg/kg body weight per day (70kg) = 2800mg /day and an average of 180mg aspartame in a can of diet
coke.

-Regulation 1333/2008/EC states that food labels of foods containing more than 10% added polyols must
state ‘excessive consumption may produce laxative effects’ (FSAI, 2018).
-People who take insulin and eat foods containing polyols may need less insulin as not all the carbohydrate
from polyols is absorbed but is still included in the total carbohydrate amount on food labels. They do not
affect blood glucose and do not provide calories.

Non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS) approved by the EU are Acesulfame -K, Aspartame, Aspartame -acesulfame
salt, Cyclamate, Neohesperidine DC, Saccharin, Sucralose, Thaumatin, Neotame and Steviol glycosides.
Polyols approved by the EU are sorbitol, mannitol, isomalt, maltitol, xylitol, lactitol, erythritol and polyglycitol
syrup (Diabetes UK, 2018).
DIABETIC FOODS -Avoid food labelled –‘diabetic’ or suitable for diabetics’ (Diabetes UK, 2018).
-Labelling food as ‘diabetic’ misleads the consumer as it implies a health benefit. So called ‘diabetic’ foods
are often energy -dense and contain similar amounts of energy and saturated fat as standard products and
they have a laxative effect when consumed in large amounts and can lead to weight gain (Diabetes UK, 2018;
NICE, 2015).
-Polyols are the sweeteners usually added to ‘diabetic foods .’ Diabetic foods use can take the place of more
nutritious foods in the diet and these products tend to be expensive (INDI, 2016; ICGP, 2016).
FIBRE People with type 2 diabetes should be encouraged to increase their fibre intake through high fibre, low
glycaemic index carbohydrates including vegetables, fruits, legumes and whole grains . Fibre intake is
generally inadequate and increases have been shown to benefit health.
SACN (2015) identified that current fibre intake in adults is around 19g/day per day. Soluble fibre has glucose
and lipid -lowering effects and insoluble cereal fibre m ainly affects bowel function. High fibre diets reduce
post-prandial glucose levels and can result in a modest reduction in HbA1c. Dietary fibre has many health
benefits but the impact on hyperglycaemia is limited (Diabetes UK, 2018). Fibre intake recommend ations
vary from 25-45g/day, with emphasis on whole grains (Diabetes UK, 2018; SACN 2015; European Guidelines
on CVD prevention in clinical practice 2016).
Food labelling & Fibre
It is no longer compulsory for fibre to be listed on food labelling. Fibre v alues will only be found in the
nutrition table on back -of-pack as g/100 g and/or per portion, and such declarations will be voluntary,
making it more difficult to interpret a product’s contribution to daily fibre needs at -a-glance (as a percentage

of the RI).
Source of fibre: contains at least 3g of fibre per 100g or at least 1.5g of fibre per 100kcal (FSAI, 2016) .
High fibre: contains at least 6g of fibre per 100g or at least 3g of fibre per 100kcal (FSAI, 2016).
PROTEIN There is no single ideal intake of carbohydrates, fats and protein for people with type 2 diabetes. With
regards protein, opting for lean protein sources, commonly found in vegetarian and Mediterranean diets is
beneficial (ADA 2019, ADA & EASD, 2018).

The Healthy Ireland HSE Food Pyramid advises 2 portions per day from the meat, poultry, fish, eggs, beans
and nuts group. Regarding specific protein sources, the food pyramid recommends cho osing lean meat,
poultry (without skin) and fish. Eat oily fish up to twice a week. Li mit processed salty meats such as sausages,
bacon and ham (HSE Food Pyramid, Department of Health, 2016). The FSAI Healthy Eating Guidelines (2019)
recommends eating vegetarian 1 -2 day per week and advises that peas, beans and lentils provide good quality protein and are a low-fat, high-fibre alternative to meat. See Oily Fish section below for more detail.
It is ESSENTIAL people with diabetes with Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) have their individual requirements
calculated – see Appendix on CKD.
RED MEAT &
PROCESSED MEAT
Red meat is a good source of some nutrients, such as protein, iron, zinc and vitamin B12. However, the
overall consumption of red and processed meat should be limited (BDA, 2015). This is due to the recognised
carcinogenic effects of red and processed meats (RPM) when consumed in large amounts. They found that
each 50 g portion of processed meat eaten daily increased the risk of colorectal cancer by 18% and the risk of
colorectal cancer could increase by 17% for every 100 g portion of red meat eaten daily (WHO 2015). Also ,
high red and processed meat consumption may be related to the high saturated fat in animal products, high
salt levels in processed meats or to the displacement of fruit and vegetables and cereals (Scarborough et al.,
2012). To reduce RPM intake, advise on smaller portions of red and processed meat, eating these meats less
often or swapping them for alternatives (SACN, 2011).

Consumption of red and processed meat is “probably carcinogenic to humans” and “carcinogenic to
humans” respectively (WHO, 2015). Consumption of RPM is associated with increased cardiovascular disease
risk (Diabetes UK, 2018).

Guidance varies regarding how much RPM we should consume. The Irish Cancer Society recommends
limiting your intake to 500g or 18oz of cooked lean red meat per week (800g/28oz of l ean raw meat). This
can be split into four or five small portions over the week. While the N HS/SACN advises if you eat more than
90g of red or processed meat a day, it's recommended that you reduce your intake to 70g a day.

Example of RPM portions:
Ireland - Pork or lamb chop - 75g or ‘Quarter pounder’ beef burger - 90g or Medium Steak - 145g. (Irish
Cancer Society). The 2019 FSAI Healthy eating guidelines (technical guide for health professionals) state a
meat serving is 50-75 g (half the size of your hand) cooked lean beef, lamb, pork or mince.

UK-https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/eat-well/red-meat-and-the-risk-of-bowel-cancer/#portion-sizes-andcutting-down
portion of Sunday roast (3 thin -cut slices of roast lamb, beef or pork, each about the size of half a slice of
sliced bread) – 90g; grilled 8oz beef steak – 163g; cooked breakfast (2 standard British sausages, around 9cm
long, and 2 thin -cut rashers of bacon) – 130g; large doner kebab – 130g; 5oz rump steak – 102g; thin slice of
corned beef – 38g; a slice of black pudding – 30g; a slice of ham – 23g

Education Resource : Visual aids are available to laminate and show the different fat contents of meat,
poultry and fish.
FAT

-Evidence continues to suggest that there is not an ideal percentage of calories from carbohydrate, protein,
and fat for people with diabetes (Evert et al 2019, DUK 2018, ADA 2019, EASD ADA 2018 , ESC 2019
Diabetes).
-ESC 2019 Diabetes recommend nutrient distribution should be based on an individualised assessment of
current eating patterns, preferences and metabolic goals.
-Recent findings suggest that any effects of fat on CVD risk factors, for prevention of CVD and metabolic
goals, are likely to be derived from the type of fat rather than the amount per se (ESC 2016 CVD, DUK 2018,
ADA 2019).
-There is increasing evidence that it is important to consider the food sources of the nutrients rather than a
sole focus on nutrients (like SFA) and dietary advice should focus on the overall health benefits or potential
risk associated with foods that are high or low in different types of fat, as part of a whole diet approach
(2015 Diabetes UK and BDA statement).
-Emphasis should be on healthful eating patterns containing nutrient -dense foods, with less focus on
specific nutrients (ADA 2019, EASD ADA 2018).
ADA 2019, DUK 2018 & ESC 2019 Diabetes recommend dietary patterns, specifically the Mediterranean and

DASH-style diets to reduce CVD r isk factors and CVD events in people with diabetes. See FURTHER
INFORMATION on DIETARY RECOMMENDATIONS: Key features of the Mediterranean and DASH -style diets
below.
-ADA 2019 and ESC 2019 Diabetes advise people with diabetes to follow the guidelines for the general
population for the recommended intakes of dietary cholesterol.
SATURATED FAT
(SFA)
The percentage of total calories from SFA should be limited (ADA 2019, ESC 2016 CVD, ESC Dyslipidaemia
2019). People with diabetes should follow guidelines for the general population for the recommended
intakes of SFA (ADA 2019 and ESC 2019 Diabetes). See below.

-The 2016 HEG rationale paper, the recent SACN 2019 report on saturated fat and health, and the cardiology
guidelines ESC 2016 CVD & ESC 2019 Dylsipidameia recommend SFA to account for <10% of total energy
intake.
-Replace SFA with unsaturated fats (Evert et al 2019, ADA 2019, DUK 2018, ESC 2019 Dyslipidaemia, SACN
2019).
-General population (Irish Guidelines): FSAI HEG 2019 - recommend fats, spreads and oils rich in SFA need
to be limited as much as possible and recommend MUFA and PUFA fats and oils can be used sparingly to
replace SFA fats and oils

The BDA & Diabetes UK 2015 position statement recommends more research is needed before suggesting
any major changes to the current healthy eating guidance and in the absence of evidence for either the
superiority or the long-term effects of adopting high SFA diets, they should not be recommended for people
with type 2 diabetes.
Monounsaturated
FAT
For CVD risk reduction, replace SFA with unsaturated fats (Evert et al 2019) in the context of Mediterranean
and DASH-style diets (ADA 2019, DUK 2018). The recent SACN 2019 report on Saturated fat and health
recommends to substitute SFA with unsaturated fat.

General population (Irish Guidelines):
 FSAI HEG 2019 recommend MUFA and PUFA fats and oils can be used sparingly to replace SFA fats and
oils. Choose limited amounts of these fats.
 HEG 2016 rationale paper- a healthy dietary pattern includes very small amounts of unsaturated reduced
fat spreads and oils.
HEG 2016 Food pyramid advise to choose MUFA or PUFA reduced-fat or light spreads and oils and to use as
little as possible.
Polyunsaturated
FAT
For CVD risk reduction, replace SFA with unsaturated fats (Evert et al 2019) in the context of Mediterranean
and DASH-style diets (ADA 2019, DUK 2018). The recent SACN 2019 report on Saturated fat and health
recommends to substitute SFA with unsaturated fat.

-ESC 2019 states there is not enough data are available to make a recommendation regarding the optimal n3: n-6 fatty acid ratio.

General population (Irish Guidelines):
 FSAI HEG 2019 recommend MUFA and PUFA fats and oils can be used sparingly to replace SFA fats and oils.
Choose limited amounts of these fats.
 HEG 2016 rationale paper- a healthy dietary pattern includes very small amounts of unsaturated reduced
fat spreads and oils.
HEG 2016 Food pyramid advise to choose MUFA or PUFA reduced-fat or light spreads and oils and to use as
little as possible.
Trans FAT Trans fats should be avoided (ADA 2019, DUK 2018, ESC Dyslipidaemia 2019, ESC 2016 CVD, ESC 2019
Diabetes).

General population (Irish Guidelines):
 FSAI HEG 2019 advise intake of TFA should be kept as low as possible. Small amounts of TFA naturally
occur in meat and dairy products. It is easy to keep intake of TFA from these sources low by simply
choosing low-fat dairy and lean cuts of meat.
HEG 2016 rationale paper, a healthy diet should contain <1% energy intake from TFA.
Plant Sterols &
Stanols
These are widely recognised to be effective in significantly reducing total and LDL cholesterol, in people with
and without diabetes. The reductions in LDL cholesterol are also seen in people already using cholesterol lowering statin drugs. Intakes of 2 -3 grams per day of plant sterol and stanol esters are effective in lowering
total and LDL cholesterol and may be recommended. However, NICE does not recommend the use of plant
sterol/stanol products for primary prevention of CVD in people with Diabetes, partly due to the lack of
evidence from hard CVD endpoints (Diabetes UK, 2018).

Based on LDL -C lowering and the absence of adverse signals, functional foods with plant sterols/stanols (at

least 2 g/day with the main meal ) may be considered : (i) in individuals with high cholesterol levels at
intermediate or low global CV risk who do not qualify for pharmacotherapy; (ii) as an adjunct to
pharmacologic therapy in high- and very high-risk individuals who fail to achieve LDL-C goals on statins or are
statin-intolerant; and (iii) in adults and children (>6 years) with FH, in line with current guidance (European
Society of Cardiology, 2016).

Therefore, these products should be advised on a case by ca se basis , they are not suitable for children
under 5 or pregnant women ( BDA, 2015). These products are more expensive to buy compared to ordinary
spreads, milk and yog hurts, if these foods are chosen it is important to continue to buy healthy foods and
have a diet rich in fruit and vegetables t o ensure adequate intake of fat -soluble vitamins. The sugar con tent
of the various cholesterol -lowering products available to buy varies and ‘no added sugar ’ varieties are
available. Refer to food labelling guidance ( food shopping card) available on www.irishheart.ie to aid the
consumer in making healthy choices. These products may offer no additional ben efit if the persons
cholesterol-lowering medicines works in the same way on inhi biting cholesterol absorption ( e.g. as in the
case with eztemibe) (BDA, 2015).
Fish & Oily Fish General population:
 A serving of cooked fish is 100g (2019 FSAI HEG & 2016 HEG).
 The 2019 FSAI HEG state that regular monitoring of contaminants in food show that it is safe to eat fish up
to two times a week. Oily fish is the best food source of long chain omega -3 fatty acids (EPA and DHA),
but tends to be higher in contaminants, so enjoy it no more than once a week . If only choosing white
fish, this can be eaten twice a week.
 Note the 2016 HEG recommends to “eat oily fish up to twice a week”.
Toxicity:
 The 2019 FSAI HEG recommendation takes into account toxicity and took the 2018 EFSA dioxin report
recommending lower tolerable weekly intake levels than previously stated into consideratio n. Of note: the
concentration of contaminants is specific to the particular species of oily fish. The FSAI is currently in the
process of developing species specific Fish Consumption Guidelines. The guidelines will provide the
number of portions of fish per week, on a species specific level, which can be safely consumed by different
population groups. The basis of these guidelines will be concentration data for methylmercury and dioxins
and the p ortion size of fish consumed by different population groups. These two inputs will be combined
to derive dietary exposure levels for each contaminant per fish species and population group. The dietary
exposure levels will then be compared to the establishe d safety thresholds for these contaminants in
order to derive the number of portions/week, which will be protective against the adverse effects
associated with these two contaminants.
 Of note, SACN issued a report on fish consumption in 2004 and recommend ed women of reproductive age
should aim to consume within the range of one to two portions of oily fish a week. Women past
reproductive age and men should aim to consume within the range of one to four portions of oily fish a
week.

Population of People with Diabetes:
 People with diabetes are at increased risk of CVD . To reduce CVD risk factors and CHD events, eat 2
portions of oily fish each week (DUK 2018). Note this is higher than what is recommended for the general
population.
 Plant sources of n -3, alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), have been shown to be associated with lower risk of CVD
(DUK 2018).
 Vegetarian sources of PUFA n-3 are found in walnuts, flax seeds, chia seeds, rapeseed oil and soya bean
oil, however dietary ALA has a low conversion rate to EPA/DHA (Pan et al 2012) and is influenced by
gender, genetics and diet (Burdge, jones et al 2002; Burdge & Wootten 2002; Vannice et al, 2014).

Fish consumption for pregnancy and breastfeeding women (2019 FSAI HEG):
 Aim to eat oily fish up to once a week which provides women with omega -3 fatty acids (EPA and DHA) for
baby’s brain and eye development and a good source of vitamin D.
 White fish especially cod and haddock provides iodine for brain development.
 Avoid shark, marlin and swordfish. These fish c ontain mercury which affects the nervous system and
developing brain of the foetus.
 Avoid all oysters and mussels as these may contain biotoxins which are not destroyed on cooking.
 Limit fresh tuna intake to once a week and tinned tuna to not more than t wo 8 oz. cans per week.
 Breastfeeding: eat oily fish up to once a week for vitamin D and omega-3 fatty acids.

Note: the 2018 HSE “My Pregnancy Expert advice for every step” guidelines:
 recommends to eat 1 to 2 portions of oily fish each week and do not h ave more than two portions of oily
fish per week because of pollutants such as dioxins.
 Breastfeeding: don’t have more than two portions of oily fish per week.

Fish oil
supplements
-There is much confusion about current guidance on fish oil supplements, which are available over the
counter (including fish oil, krill oil, cod liver oil and algal oil). These provide a range of doses and forms of
omega 3. Of note cod liver oil also contains vitamin A & vitamin D.
-Fish oil supplements are also available at h igh doses as a medical prescription. If someone is taking
prescription dose n-3 PUFA they need to be under the care and monitored by a medical doctor.

The Community Dietitian educates people on dietary strategies to increase omega -3 intake from foods as
part of a healthy balanced diet. FSAI 2019 state oily fish is the best food source of long chain omega 3 fatty
acids (EPA & DHA). See oily fish section above for more information.

Regarding supplements:
Re CVD risk: Routine use of n -3 fish oil supplements is not recommended for CVD risk reduction in Type 2
Diabetes at this time (Evert et al 2019, ADA 2019, SIGN 2017, NICE CVD 2014, ESC 2019 Diabetes).

Re Drug treatment for Hypertriglyceridaemia:
-DUK 2018 states there is conflicting evidence and concerns about the potential adverse effect on lipid
profile but there is some evidence of the beneficial effects for those with elevated blood triglycerides.
- For your information, the recent ESC Dyslipid aemia 2019 guidelines include a new recommendation for
Drug treatments of patients with hypertriglyceridaemia - “In high-risk (or above*) patients with triglyceride
levels between 1.5 -5.6 mmol/L despite statin treatment, n -3 PUFAs (icosapent ethyl 2 X2 g/day) should be
considered in combination with a statin”. *’Above’ classifies different patients types in ESC 2019 – see
guidelines for more information.
Note this is a medical prescription and anyone taking a prescription of n -3 PUFAs for lowering high
triglycerides need to be under the care of a GP/consultant . The GP/consultant advises on same, not the
dietitian – the dietitian advises people to discuss further with the medical team.
-Of note, there are currently no n -3 PUFA containing products ava ilable on the community drug scheme.
These items were removed in 2012. The HSE will not reimburse for any prescription for this range of
products under the primary care schemes at this time.

Caution and safety:
-Fish oil supplements can adversely intera ct with medicines including warfarin, aspirin, propranolol &
clopidogrel and should only be taken after discussion with either your Community Pharmacist or a doctor .
(See Medicine Appendix for more info).
-People with diabetes should consult their doctor if they are already taking them or before taking them.
MICRONUTRIENTS Supplementation is not recommended in the management or prevention of Type 2 Diabetes (Diabetes UK,
2018; ADA, 2019). Encourage individuals choosing supplements to discuss their needs with their Dietitian.
See Pregnancy Appendix re folic acid.
Encourage foods naturally rich in antioxidants (tocopherols, carotenoids, vitamin C, flavonoids,
polyphenols, and phytic acid), trace elements and other vitamins. Consume a variety of fruit & vegetables
for vitamins and antioxidants. Intakes of wholegrain bread, cereals and oily fish are sources of wa ter and
fat-soluble vitamins.
A Multi-vitamin supplement may be ne eded for elderly, women planning a pregnancy, vegetarians,
people with coeliac disease, individuals following a n eating pattern that restricts calories or a
macronutrient (ADA, 2019) .
Vitamin B12 must be checked annually for those on metformin due to risk of deficiency (HSE Diabetes
Model of Care 2018) .
The FSAI Healthy Eating Guidelines (2019) advise that Vitamin D -rich foods and low -dose vitamin D
supplements are the most reliable and safe sources of vitamin D. Oily fish is the best natural source and
vitamin D fortified dairy product s are also available. People choosing a supplement of vitamin D should
take a low -dose supplement which provides a maximum of 5 -10 μg of vitamin D per day as taking very
high amounts of vitamin D can be harmful.
SALT/SODIUM <6g Salt (NaCl) per day as per general population. Aim for a diet high in fruits and vegetables and low -fat
dairy products. Studies suggest benefits to lowering salt intake to <3g Salt (NaCl) / day in people with Type 2
Diabetes (Diabetes UK , 2018). While reducing sodium to the gener al recommendation of <2.3g/day
demonstrates beneficial effects on blood pressure, further reduction warrants caution & should be
considered only on an individual basis. (ADA, 2019) Reductions in salt in general in both normotensive and
hypertensive individuals are effective in lowering blood pressure. DASH style diet has been shown to
decrease blood pressure i n people with Type 2 Diabetes ( Diabetes UK , 2018; ADA 2019). Food Shopping
Card available on https://irishheart.ie/publications/food-shopping-card/ to aid the consumer in choosing low
salt foods.
People with diabetes with CKD are recommended a no added salt diet – see Appendix.

FURTHER INFORMATION on DIETARY RECOMMENDATIONS:
Key features of the Mediterranean and DASH-style diets
 Decrease salt intake (<6g/day).
 Eat two portions of oily fish each week.
 Eat more whole grains, fruit and vegetables, fish, nuts and legumes.
 Eat less red and processed meat, refined carbohydrate and sugar-sweetened beverages.
 Replace saturated fats with unsaturated fats, and limit intakes of trans fatty acids .
 Limit alcohol to <14 units per week (Diabetes UK, 2018). NOTE: Irish guidance on alcohol less than 17 standard drinks .
(170g alcohol) per week for men and 11 standard drinks (110g alcohol) per week for women .

Key reference:
The ADA May 2019 report (Nutrition Therapy for Adults with Diabetes or Prediabetes: A Consensus Report) summarises different
eating patterns and the potential benefits reported in Table 3 – it is a useful reference for supporting discussions with peers and
people with diabetes (see Support folder on Diet).

Prompts to support Dietary recommendations discussion
Food Group Servings per day Prompts
Foods and drinks high
in fat, sugar and salt
Not every day.
Maximum once or
twice per week
Diet/full sugar fizzy drinks/dilutable drinks, sugar/sweetener, Honey/jam/marmaladebeliefs regarding sugar substitutes. Diabetic products. Processed foods.
Dressings/sauces. Biscuits/crisps/cakes/chocolate/sweets/ice-cream/desserts
Fats, spreads and oils In very small
amount
Type (saturated/unsaturated/trans) and amount used, mayonnaise/dressings.
Meat, poultry, fish,
eggs, beans and nuts
2 servings Oily fish, red/processed meats, eggs. Nuts – salted/unsalted and amount.
Misconceptions re: cholesterol. Use of pulses/vegetarian meals.
Milk, yogurt & Cheese 3 servings Full-fat/low-fat/reduced fat. See Appendix on Food Labelling for further information.
Wholemeal cereals
and bread, potatoes,
pasta and rice
3-7 servings Servings dependent on gender, age, activity. Fibre content of choices. Fat added –
spread/sauces/fried, etc. Portion sizes.
Vegetables, salad and
fruit
5-7 servings Soups –homemade/salt/fat content. Fruit juices/smoothies –
amount/processed/sugar added. Tinned fruit – in juice/syrup. Dried fruit – portions.
Cooking methods – steamed/roasted/fried. Additions – sugar, salt, fat.

2. ALCOHOL

Alcohol and Type 2 Diabetes
 Assess alcohol consumption and discuss current intake in the context of; the effect on diabetes and potential risks
associated with alcohol intake and diabetes as appropriate (↑ risk of hypoglycaemia, weight gain, ↑ HTN, ↑ Triglycerides,
aggravates hypertriglyceridaemia). Encourage avoidance in overweight, hypertension, hypertriglyceridaemia, history of
alcohol abuse, pregnancy, medical problems – liver disease, neuropathy, pancreatitis, erectile dysfunction.
 If overweight, hypertensive or hypertriglyceridaemic – limit alcohol.
 Alcohol is high in calories and does not provide any nourishment with one standard drink containing between 100-150
calories. E.g. 3.5pts of beer = 3 slices pepperoni pizza ( https://www.askaboutalcohol.ie/health/). Guidance for the public
available (2020) at https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/alcohol/physical-health/alcohols-effect-on-the-body/weight-gain.html
and https://www2.hse.ie/healthy-you/alcohol-blogs/7-things-to-know-about-alcohol-and-your-weight.html
 Red wine may confer additional cardiovascular benefits only for those consuming a Me diterranean style diet (Dyson et al .,
2018). A reduction in alcohol intake in hypertensive individuals has been shown to reduce blood pressure especially if more
than 28g alcohol is consumed daily (Dyson et al., 2018).
 If on insulin/ sulphonylureas - consume alcohol with meal containing carbohydrate to prevent hypoglycaemia and note
there is increased risk of hypoglycaemia with quantity of alcohol consumed. There is risk of delayed nocturnal or fasting
hypoglycaemia after evening alcohol consumption. Educating people with diabetes abou t the signs, symptoms, and self –
management of delayed hypoglycaemia after drinking alcohol, especially when using insulin or sulphonylureas is
recommended. The importance of glucose monitoring after drinking alcohol bever ages to reduce hypoglycaemia risk
should be emphasised (ADA , 2019).
 Provide hypoglycaemia advice as appropriate to those prescribed diabetes medicine that pose a hypo risk (see Appendix
on Hypoglycaemia ).
 Provide current advice regarding weekly low risk drinking guidelines for alcohol , choices and use of mixers.
 It may also be useful to discuss the amount of carbohydrate and calories in alcoholic drinks.

Weekly low risk drinking guidelines for alcohol
 Moderate use of alcohol is recommended. The Irish weekly low risk d rinking guidelines on alcohol are available on
https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/alcohol/improve-your-health/weekly-low-risk-alcohol-guidelines.html and are based on
research about the amount of alcohol that reduces the risk of harm over a person’s lifetime (based on a lifetime risk of dyin g
from alcohol) and that reduces the risk of injury on a single occasion of drinking.
 Though moderate drinking may have benefits, non-drinkers are not advised to commence taking alcohol.
 Weekly low risk drinking guidelines are:

- less than 11 standard drinks a week for women and less than 17 standard for men, spread out over the course of a
week, with at least 2 -3 alcohol free days . 1 standard drink (SD) = approx. 10g pure alcohol (1/2 pint beer, 1 pub measure
spirits 35.5mls, 1 small glass wine 12.5% volume). Note: 1 bottle of wine (12.5%) is about 7 SDs.

-2-3 alcohol free days per week to minimise tolerance and habit formation.

- Not consuming more than 6 Standard Drinks on any one occasion.

 It is also recommended to not to exceed the upper limits - drinking more than 6 standard drinks in a single session is
considered binge drinking and can seriously increase the harmful effects of drinking. It increases risk of serious health
problems like cancer, liver disease and high blood pressure (https://www.askaboutalcohol.ie/faqs/). More information
available at https://www2.hse.ie/alcohol-and-health/

Resources
 The HSE website on Alcohol (2020) www.askaboutalcohol.ie now links to https://www2.hse.ie/alcohol/ providing
guidance, a drinks calculator, self-assessment tool and information on alcohol supports and services. The website
www.askaboutalcohol.ie has been merged into the new HSE website as of 2020. A poster is available in the support
folder on alcohol.
 HSE Alcohol Helpline on 1800 459 459.
 Drinkaware is an independent, national not -for-profit organisation which offers educational resources on
www.drinkaware.ie , i.e. standard drink measure cup, drinks wheel calculator to support education.

3. BEHAVIOUR CHANGE – Supporting Behaviour Change
Whilst diabetes management is in essence about maintain ing healthy lifestyle behaviours which result in improved outcomes and
thus improved quality of life and health, it remains a challenge.
It is now acknowledged that only the person with diabetes has expertise about their own diabetes and their own life . The
responsibility of the health care professional is to help them to explore their own expertise, to highlight how diabetes fits into their
lives and where there is an obstacle that can prevent optimal management of diabetes. People are responsible for their own s elfmanagement (Hendrieckx et al., 2016).

In discussing how to support people to face life with diabetes Hendrieckx et al (2016) remind s that u nderstanding the condition
facilitates the coping process and will help people in making sense of their new reality. It is important for the person:
- To be informed of the treatment options, the course of diabetes and the seriousness of diabetes
- Know that the condition can be effectively managed and does not have to lead to complications – untreated diabetes is the
leading cause of many complications but well-managed diabetes is the leading cause of nothing.
- Understand that they will experience ‘ups and downs’ in the way they feel about diabetes. (Hendrieckx et al., 2016)

The challenge for healthcare professionals is to develop an understanding of what influences health behaviour and to acquire the
necessary skills that will enable them to facilitate change (Pearson, 2014). It is recognised that the single most important factor that
influences change is the practitioner comm unication skills, which can influence motivati on and change (Najvitis & Weiss, 1994;
Miller & Rollick , 2013). As health care professionals, consideration to our philosophy of care in terms of the care we deliver and
how we deliver it , is important to supporting people with diabetes w ith effective behaviour change. A philosophy of care for
supporting people with type 2 diabetes and their families is summarised in the introduction of this guideline . Working in a person
centred way (that takes account of the psychosocial aspects of care) , with the understanding and practice of an empowerment
approach to care , is now recognised as essential in health care, particularly when supporting those with chronic diseases to self
manage and change behaviours (Diabetes UK, 2018; HSE, 2018; ADA, 2019).

It is also necessary to have some understanding of a person’s previous experience and how they think and feel about their situation,
as this will u ltimately influence behaviour. Attitudes, beliefs, individual learning styles and the social, cultural, re ligious and
economic situation will also affec t behaviour. A person’s environment also influences health and ability and motivation to change
(Pearson, 2014).

The skills and mindset of health care professionals is recognised to influence how effective they are as behaviour change agents
(Pearson, 2014). The opportunity to reflect on and develop good communication/interpersonal skills through training, self reflection and peer support/reflection is important for health care professionals.

An integrated approach to changing behaviour in dietetic practice has been presented, outlining the theories, guiding principles,
communication skills and practitioner development (Pearson, 2014). These are summarised below:
Theory addresses: 1. Models used to understand and influence behaviour, including Egan’s Helping Model and the Stages of Change
Model by Prochaska and DiClemente. As the complexity of human behaviour can never fully be understood, no model or approach
can be complete, though they help. Michie et al. (2014) present 83 theories in the ABC of Behaviour Change Theories that guide our
understanding and care delivery . 2. Psychological approaches, such as motivationa l interviewing, behaviour therap y and cognitive
behaviour therapy.

Guiding principles that motivate and guide health care professionals and influence the way they apply skills include core conditions
of a helping relationship (empathy, gen uineness, acceptance), respect client autono my, client responsibility, social influence
(everyone has the ability to change), collaboration, self efficacy (believe change is possible), empowerment, client centred model of
care vs. medical model. Stewart (1995) developed the client centred model to consider the client as a person addressing:
1. Explore the disease and the illness experience
2. Understand the whole person
3. Find common ground
4. Incorporate prevention and health promotion
5. Enhance the client-practitioner relationship
6. Be realistic.
Communication skills to support client care include: meeting and greeting clients and their families/carers, attending behaviour (e.g.
non-verbal communication, pace, tone, minimal encouragers, verbal following ), paraphrasing, reflecting feelings, questions,
summarising, how to provide information, listen and reflecting change talk.
Motivational strategies to support client care include for example : OARS (Open questions, affirmations , reflecting , summarise),
establishing common agendas, eliciting information o n current behaviours, understanding a typical day, exploring
ambivalence/resistance (pros & cons), importance, confidence, readiness to change, exploring barriers to change, exploring options
for change, problem solving, making plans, setting goals, use of rewards, building support, self monitoring and developing self
awareness, supporting lapses and setbacks.

Cognitive behaviour strategies to support client care includes raising awareness of unhelpful thoughts and their impact on
behaviour (thoughts, feelings, actions), the role of helpful thoughts and their impact on coping and supporting helpful behav iours.

In 2016 clinical guidelines were developed by a mental health team in Australia to support people with diabetes and their
emotional health (Hendrieckx et al ., 2016). These were adapted by the NHS in 2019 (see Appendix on Psychosocial care and the
support folder for a copy , Hendrieckx et al ., 2016) . These guidelines highlight the importance of supp orting behaviour change
through;
 Health care professionals considering and developing communication skills
 Health care professionals supporting people in a ‘ helpful way’ to face up to the diagnosis of diabetes & support change
 To consider how the health literacy needs of people are supported during care delivery (also acknowledged by the HSE)
 To consider the language that is used by health care professionals that may not be helpful to supporting self-care (see Appendix
on Language for more information).

Guidance for helping a person make changes to fit into their life has been concisely described in the Diabetes and Emotional
Health handbook (Hendrieckx et al., 2016)
 When asking people to make significant changes to their lifestyle, it is important to convey a message of hope, empathy, and
understanding, while being factual and informative.

 It is important to refrain from using threat or fear-based persuasion, particularly if the perso n is not ready to face the reality and
the consequences of diabetes for their future.

 It is more constructive to understand why a person may not be making the changes that would be appear to be ‘good’ for them.

 Help the person to understand their own barriers in implementing optimal diabetes self -management and ways to overcome
these barriers.

 Create a space where the person can reflect on where they are now, so they can realise their own priorities and preferences –
what is it they like and don’t li ke about where they are now, and what they like and don’t like about where they see themselves
in X years’ time, if they don’t make some changes.

 Acknowledge that other issues may have greater priority for them right now; explore the person’s own ‘ road blocks’ and help
them to identify how important these are to them or whether they can find ways to overcome them.

 With all this in mind, explore what options they have for making changes that would benefit their health.

 Enhance the person’s confidence to undertake specific behaviours. When someone is asking for help to achieve their goals, help
them to reflect on their options for changing, and support them to make realistic steps. This makes it more likely that they will
try and succeed.

 Successful completion of one step (e.g. walking for 30 minutes once a week) increases people’s confidence in undertaking the
next step (e.g. walking for 30 minutes three times a week) and so on.

 Work with the person to develop a realistic and individualised action plan, and to identify resources to aid change. Ensure that
the actions you agree upon are relatively easy with few barriers.
In the real word there are many barriers to optimal self -care which hamper individual efforts to achieve optimal outcomes or
change their motivational focus. As a health care professional, acknowledge barriers with empathy at all times. If in doubt, over celebrate, under-criticise and honour effort as well as outcomes (Hendrieckx et al., 2016)

NICE has highlighted the importance of behaviour change in recommendations in 2007 and in 2014 and the ADA in 2019.
Supporting behaviour change is NOT about getting people to comply with or adhere to provider -selected goals. Behaviour
strategies are NOT applied to people to get them to change. Our role is not to change behaviour but to INSPIRE, INFORM, SUPPORT
and FACILITATE their efforts to identify and attain their own goals (Funnell & Anderson, 2005).

Dietitians support people and their families with making behaviour changes in both the group and 1-1 setting. Good communication
is essential in both settings and the learning for one setting is transferable to the other . Facilitation skills are required to support
care delivery in the group setting. Self-reflection and peer reflection and support are essential to developing skills for both settings.

Key reference/Further reading: Facing Life with Diabetes (Chapter 2) in Hendrieckx, C., Halliday, J.A., Beeney, L.J., Speight, J. (2016)
Diabetes and Emotional Health: a practical guide for healthcare professionals supporting adults with Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes ,
ed. Canberra: National Diabetes Services Scheme, 19-30; Manual of Dietetic Practice 2014 – Chapter 1.3 Changing health behaviour
by Dympna Pearson; The Art of Empowerment by Bob Anderson (see psychosocial care folder); 101 Tips for Behaviour Change in
Diabetes Education by R Anderson et al (ADA 2002) (see psychosocial care folder).

4. BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING - Self-monitoring blood glucose (SMBG)

SMBG recommendations for peop le with Type 2 Diabetes living in Ireland are based on their diabetes treatment and
recommendations of their diabetes care team (e.g. GP, PN, DNS). SMBG is based on capillary blood glucose measurements.

The Medicines Management programme report on Self -Monitoring of Blood Glucose (SMBG) in Type 2 Diabetes 2016 is available on
www.hse.ie/yourmedicines along with Frequently Asked Questions for health care professionals and people with diabetes and in the
support folder on blood glucose monitoring.

 Some people with Type 2 diabetes may not be required to self-test their capillary blood glucose levels.
 Those who are prescribed medicine for diabetes management are generally advised to self-test.
 The frequency of testing is dependent upon the type of medicine prescribed. Medicines associated with hypoglycaemia require
more frequent blood glucose monitoring e.g. sulphonylureas and insulin.
 The leaflet ‘Guide to Blood Glucose (Sugar) Testing Type 2 Diabetes ’ outlines when and how often testing is required. This leaflet
is available to order for use with client s – order from www.healthpromotion.ie under the Healthy Eating Category and it can be
viewed at https://www.healthpromotion.ie/hp-files/docs/HDP00976.pdf or in the support folder.

Access to blood-glucose strips for Type 2 Diabetes:
 As of April 1, 2016, rules about access to unlimited amounts of blood glucose strips for some people with type 2 diabetes hav e
changed. The HSE National Clinical Programme for Diabetes (NCPD) published guidance on self-testing for people with Type 2
diabetes. The Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCSR), under the guidance of the Medicines Management Programme
(MMP) and the NCPD, has updated its reimbursement arrangements for blood glucose test strips (BGTS).
 It is recommended to read the document ‘Type 2 Diabetes Test Strips Reimbursement, Questions and Answers for Health
Professionals’ and ‘Type 2 Diabetes Test Strips: Questions and Answers for Patients’
http://www.hse.ie/eng/about/Who/clinical/natclinprog/diabetesprogramme/Bloodsugartesting/ . Available in the support folder
on blood glucose monitoring.
 The amount of blood glucose test strips required are based on medicine prescribed, but please note while current guidance
recommends that people with Type Two Diabetes treated through diet alone do not need to self-test, people managed through
diet alone will be reimbursed for 2 boxes of test strips per annum i.e. 100 test strips/annum, see below, available at;
https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/primarycare/east-coast-diabetes-service/diabetes-nursing/capillary-blood-glucosemonitoring/

Diabetes Treatment Number of Test Strips
Diet 100 / year
Metformin
DPP-IV Inhibitor
GLP-1 Analog
Thiazolidnedone (TZD)
SGLT2 Inhibitor
50 / month
Sulphonylurea e.g. Gliclazide 100 / month
Insulin therapy Unlimited

Planning pregnancy Unlimited

The Letter advising re: Reimbursement of Blood Glucose Test Strips (BGTS) for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, Prof
Michael Barry National Clinical Lead, Medicines Management Programme is available at
https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/clinical-strategy-and-programmes/bgts-for-patients-with-type-2-diabetesmellitus.pdf

 It is appreciated that there are clinical situations where enhanced blood glucose monitoring may be required (e.g. acute illness,
therapy changes, pregnancy) and in such cases extra reimbursement support is available via an on -line application system.
Additional strips can be prescribed where necessary by contacting PCRS online services on www.pcrs.ie. This service is
available to allow immediate access to additional test strips reimbursed under the co mmunity drugs schemes. The person’s
physician, whether in primary care or in the hospital setting, can then use this online process to increase individual person’s
reimbursement limits.

The HSE Blood Glucose Monitoring Review Group in 2017 developed and signed off on two resource s for Health Care
Professionals (available in the support folder on blood glucose monitoring).
1. Best Practice Guidelines for HCPs – when monitoring capillary blood glucose in healthcare settings; and
2. Best Practice Guidelines for HCPs – when educating patients and carers to self-test capillary blood glucose

These Best Practice Guidelines give information on: choice of equipment, registration of device, ordering of results, units of
measurement, consumables, quality control, training and contraindications.

Clinical Targets for target s/goals for SMB G: Please be aware of advice in your LHO area (community & acute). The current My
Diabetes Health Result Form uses targets by ADA, 2019 (bolded). See Clinical Targets Appendix. Others are provided for reference.
Reference Postprandial Capillary Glucose Target Blood glucose
Harkins, 2008 1 hour < 8mmol/L
Practice in CUH 2 hours <7 mmol/L
IDF, 2011 * Post meal ≤ 9.0mmol/L
ADA, 2019 1-2 hours after the beginning of the meal <10mmol/L
ICGP, 2016 Nil available Nil available
Model of Integrated Care, 2018 Nil available Nil available
Reference Pre-prandial Capillary Glucose Target Blood Glucose
ADA, 2019 Before meal 4.4 – 7.2 mmol/L
ICGP, 2016 Nil available Nil available
Model of Integrated Care, 2018 Nil available Nil available
ADA 2019 guidance is available in the support folder on blood glucose monitoring.

Resources (available in the support folder on blood glucose monitoring)

HSE Guide to Blood Glucose Monitoring https://www.healthpromotion.ie/hp-files/docs/HDP00976.pdf and see support folder.

Diabetes and Driving - Driving Guidelines from NDLS , RSA (leaflet) https://www.ndls.ie/images/Documents/Forms/Diabetes-andDriving.pdf . For a copy please see the appendix on Hypoglycaemia and the support folder on Hypos and Driving. The RSA Medical
Fitness to Drive Guidelines was updated in August 2019 fr om April and are in the support folder on hypos and driving.
https://www.ndls.ie/images/PDF_Documents/Slainte_agus_Tiomaint_Medical_Fitness_to_Drive_Guidelines.pdf

Summary of Current Evidence:

1. Please note slight differences exist between recommendations so it is important to be aware of advice in yo ur LHO area
(community & acute) /GP practice sites on post-prandial blood glucose and discuss same with the teams in your area to
promote consistent evidence based advice for use with people with diabetes.

2. The importance of individual goals being set for p eople with diabetes by their GP/diabetes team must also be stressed
and explained to people.

Guidelines on SMBG from NICE 2015 (endorsed in the Model of Integrated Care Guidelines, 2018):

1. Do not routinely offer self-monitoring of blood glucose levels for adults with type 2 diabetes unless:
 the person is on insulin; or
 there is evidence of hypoglycaemic episodes; or
 the person is on oral medicine that may increase their risk of hypoglycaemia while driving or operating machinery or increasing
activity level; or
 the person is pregnant, or is planning to become pregnant.

2. Consider short-term self-monitoring of blood glucose levels in adults with type 2 diabetes (and review treatment as necessary)
when;
 starting treatment with oral or intravenous corticosteroids; or
 intercurrent illness; or
 to confirm suspected hypoglycaemia.

3. Be aware that adults with type 2 diabetes who have acute intercurrent illness are at risk of worsening hyperglycaemia. Review
treatment as necessary.

4. If adults with type 2 diabetes are self -monitoring their blood gl ucose levels, carry out a structured assessment at least annually.
The assessment should include:
 the person's self-monitoring skills;
 the quality and frequency of testing;
 checking that the person knows how to interpret the blood glucose results and what action to take;
 the impact on the person's quality of life;
 the continued benefit to the person; and
 the equipment used.

ICGP, 2016 endorse the following recommendation from NICE Guidelines, 2015;
 NICE recommend that self -monitoring should not be considered as a stand -alone intervention, but used in conjunction with
appropriate therapy as part of integrated self -care and that it should be taught if the need/purpose is cl ear and agreed with the
person with diabetes.

ADA, 2019 recommendation re: SMBG;
 SMBG is an integral component of effective therapy of people taking insulin. In recent years, CGM has emerged as a
complementary method for the assessment of glucose levels. Glu cose monitoring allows people to evaluate their individual
response to therapy and assess whether glycaemic targets are being safely achieved. Integrating results into diabetes
management can be a useful tool for guiding medical nutrition therapy and physical activity, preventing hypoglycaemia, and
adjusting medicines (particularly prandial insulin doses). The person’s specific needs and goals should dictate SMBG frequency
and timing or the consideration of CGM use.

Further Information on Flash Glucose Monitoring – THE FREESTYLE LIBRE SYSTEM

In practice the Freestyle Libre System may be prescribed by a hospital consultant to help meet the care of people with Type 2
Diabetes under special circumstance s e.g. those with severe visual impairment. Many Community Dietitians are being asked
questions by people with type 2 diabetes on same. Information circulated in Ju ne 2019 by Diabetes Ireland is in the support folder
on BGM.

In August 2019, the RSA Medical Fitness to Drive were updated to recognise products measuring interstitial fluid and give specific
guidance on same on page 68 – see the support folder on Hypos and Driving for a copy of these guidelines.

Freestyle Libre System;
The Health Technology Assessment Group prepared an Advice Note 2017/001 on the Freestyle Libre System - What is the clinical
effectiveness, safety and budget impact of the Freestyle Libre System compared with current glucose monitoring methods for pe ople
aged 4 years and over with diabetes mellitus who use multiple daily injections of insulin? It is available at;
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/htag/publications/htag -advice-note-freestyle-libre.pdf. The advice has been
produced following completion of an evidence review by the Health Technology Assessment Group (HTAG), in response to a reques t
from the Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS) of the Health Service Executive. It addresses target population, proposed
benefits, clinical effectiveness, device safety, budget implications, conclusions and recommendations and the importance of one
year evaluation. As ‘no part of this advice may be used without the whole of the advice being quoted in full’ it is recommended to
read the advice note.

Important points to note in this advice note;
 The sensor measures glucose levels in interstitial fluid.
 SMBG is still required during periods of rapidly changing glucose levels, or if hypoglycaemia or impending hypoglycaemia is
reported, or the symptoms do not match the system readings.
 Drivers will need to continue with SMBG as there are times when confirma tion with capillary blood glucose is required. See the
August 2019 RSA guidelines for guidance on Group 1 drivers and legal requirements for Group 2 drivers, to meet current driving
requirements in Ireland.

Reference: Letter re: Reimbursement of Abbott FreeStyle Libre Sensor effective 1st April 2018
https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/pcrs/circulars/pharmacy/10-2018-pharmacy-circular.pdf
From Anne Marie Hoey, Primary Care Reimbursement & Eligibility to Irish Pharmacies.

5. CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD)

CKD attributed to diabetes (diabetic ki dney disease/Nephropathy), occurs in 20 –40% of people with diabetes, typically developing
after a duration of 10years in those with type 1 but may be present at diagnosis in those with type 2 diabetes . T he presence of
CKD markedly increases cardiovasc ular risk and health care costs. CKD can progress to end -stage renal disease (ESRD) requiring
dialysis or kidney transplantation (ADA, 2019).

Diabetic kidney disease is usually a clinical diagnosis made based on the persistent presence of albuminuria and/or reduced eGFR
in the absence of signs or symptoms of other primary causes of kidney damage. The typical presentation of diabetic kidney disease
is considered to include a long -standing duration of diabetes, retinopathy, albuminuria without haematuria, and gradually
progressive loss of eGFR. However , signs of CKD may be present at diagnosis or without retinopathy in Type 2 diabetes, and
reduced eGFR without albuminuria has been frequently reported in type 2 diabetes and is becoming more common over time as the
prevalence of diabetes increases in the U.S. (ADA, 2019).

Dietitian support in the management of CKD in the community is recommended.

The INDI Renal Interest Group (RIG) have reviewed the evidence for the dietary management of chronic kidney disease and are
providing the latest guidance in an online course which is available in Spring 2020. This training is strongly recommended for all
Community Dietitians supporting people with type 2 diabetes.

Supporting dietitian resources have been updated by RIG and are provided in the support folder on CKD for information only , as
training is essential for their use:
 The INDI RIG (2018) Guide to NCP in CKD Stage 1-3A to support dietitian care.
 CKD Stages and Dietary intervention – guidance produced by the INDI Renal Interest Group (RIG) in May 2018

See the Appendix on clinical targets for further guidance on current recommendations for people with type 2 diabetes.
Follow local PPPGs re clients seen and access/shared care with local acute dietetic care services for renal disease.

Supporting completion of Health results for assessment and monitoring CKD e.g. ACR and eGFR
(see Appendix on Clinical targets & My diabetes health results form)

a. Assessment
- Liaison with practice staff in seeking assessment of urine albumin:creatinine ratio (ACR), serum creatinine and estimate
eGFR (estimated glomerular filtration rate) in people with diabetes is recommended to assess for CKD (NICE, 2014; IC GP,
2016, Model of Integrated Care, 2018).
- ACR, serum creatinine and eGFR should be measured at diagnosis of diabetes and annually (at least) thereafter ( ICGP, 2016;
Model of Integrated Care, 2018).
- To detect and identify proteinuria, use urine ACR in preference to protein:creatinine ratio (PCR), because it has greater
sensitivity than PCR for low levels of proteinuria. ACR is the recommended method for pe ople with diabetes. (NICE, 2014)

b. Screening – See Appendix on Clinical Targets for further guidance on ACR
- Screening for albuminuria can be most easily performed by urinary albumin -to-creatinine ratio in a random spot urine collection.
If positive result this should be confirmed by a subsequent early morning sample (NICE, 2014).
IMPORTANT NOTE - (ADA, 2019 ): Exercise within 24 hours, infection, fever, congestive heart failure, marked hyperglyc aemia,
menstruation, and marked hypertension may elevate ACR independently of kidney damage.

c. Interpretation of Results - Liaison with practice staff in the interpretation/review of clinical outcomes is recommended.

d. ACR interpretation - See clinical targets section for details on interpretation of abnormal results
- Serum creatinine interpretation - Use this information to calculate eGFR. eGFR should be calculated from serum creatinine
using a validated formula. See www.mdcalc.com and use the CKD-EPI or MDRD equation.

e. Results
- Confirmation of a diagnosis of CKD is very important and CKD must be d iagnosed by GP or diabetologist on a series of results,
not once off measurements.
- People should be informed about diagnosis of renal disease by GP or diabetologist.
- Community Dietitians support the diabetes care team and people with diabetes to have ACR and eGFR assessed and reviewed.

- Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) recommends a comprehensive CKD staging that incorporates albuminuria
at all stages of eGFR; this system is more closely associated with risk but is also more complex and does not translate direc tly to
treatment decisions (ADA, 2019). Regardless of classi fication scheme, both eGFR and albuminuria should be quanti fied to
guide treatment decisions(ADA, 2019).

- Be aware that:
o increased ACR is associated with increased risk of adverse outcomes
o decreased GFR is associated with increased risk of adverse outcomes
o increased ACR and decreased GFR in combination multiply the risk of adverse outcomes. (NICE, 2014)

Classification of chronic kidney disease using GFR and ACR categories (KDIGO, 2012).
Explanation of CKD classified according to estimated GFR (eGFR) and albumin:creatinine ratio (ACR) (NICE, 2014)
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg182/chapter/key-priorities-for-implementation#table-1-classification-of-chronic-kidneydisease-using-gfr-and-acr-categories

- using 'G' to denote the GFR category (G1–G5, which have the same GFR thresholds as the CKD stages 1–5 recommended
previously) and 'A' for the ACR category (A1–A3), for example:
 A person with an eGFR of 25 ml/min/1.73m2 and an ACR of 15 mg/mmol has CKD G4A2.
 A person with an eGFR of 50 ml/min/1.73m2 and an ACR of 35 mg/mmol has CKD G3aA3.
 An eGFR of less than 15 ml/min/1.73m2 (GFR category G5) is referred to as kidney failure.

Permission for inclusion of the table below has been provided to the INDI RIG by KDIGO.

Reference KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney
International Supplements volume 3 | issue 1 | JANUARY 2013

Treatment
- On assessment and confirmation of renal function by GP or diabetologist , advise people on any necessary dietary and
lifestyle changes required to slow the progression of renal disease. Model of integrated Care, 2018 recommend treatments
to optimise; g lycaemic control; lipid control; and blood pressure control (including treatment with an ACE inhibitor or an ARB).

- The Irish Nutrition and Dietetic Institute Renal Interest Group recommend that the dietary advice should depend on the stage
of the renal disease, based on estimation of the eGFR, using the MDRD equation. See www.mdcalc.com and use the MDRD
equation.

- For people with diabetes and CKD , provide appropriate dietary advice for the management of each stage. It important to
classify stage 3 as 3A and 3B.

o Follow guidance as advised at INDI RIG training in use of the CKD and dietary interventions guidance.
o The guidance for calculation of requirements will be provided at this training in relation to the CKD stages . The INDI Nutrition
Support Reference Guide provides guidance for the calculation of requirements (2015). Individual care plans will be based on
unique nutritional and biochemical assessments.

o Guidelines for protein requirements , including for the older person with CKD , are available in the INDI Nutrition Support
Reference Guide – see Chapter 3 for Adult requirements and Chapter 22 Section E for requirements for Older people.
o People with CKD and type 2 diabetes who attend structured patient education need further dietetic support. It is important to
individualise protein requirements. They may require at least one individual appointment.
o A website has been developed for supporting Irish clients with CKD – www.irishkidneydiet.ie

References
 INDI Renal Interest Group
 ADA, 2019 – American Diabetes Association – Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes; The Journal of Clinical and Applied
Research and Education, Diabetes Care, January 2019.
 ICGP, 2016 –A Practical Guide to Integrated Type 2 Diabetes Care.
 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation
and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney international, Suppl. 3, 2013; 3: 1-150.
 Model of Integrated Care for Patient with Type Two Diabetes - A Guide for Health Care Professional, 2018.
 NICE, 2014 – Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults: Assessment and Management. Clinical Guideline, 2014.

6. CLINICAL TARGETS FOR ADULTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES
The key message re clinical targets is that each individual clinical measure has a target individualised for every person with
diabetes. Those who are pregnant or those planning a pregnancy and older adults will require their individual targets to be
reviewed and discussed as part of their care. See relevant Appendices.
The person will be advised ‘Your diabetes team will work with you to decide what results are best for you. You may aim for hi gher or
lower targets depending on your age, how long you have diabetes for and your medical history’ , as listed in the ‘My Diabetes Health
Result Form’ resource.

Targets are listed below and referenced. The summary from the references are available in a table in the support folder on Clinical
targets. Other supporting information is also available in this folder.

CLINICAL TARGETS for NON -PREGNANT PEOPLE WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES

Outcome of Care TARGET/GOAL CHECK
HbA1c1,2, ≤ 53 (7%) At least 3 times a year
(Glycated haemoglobin) ≤ 48 (6.5%) may be suitable for those newly diagnosed & without significant co-morbidities
mmol/mol (%) ≤ 58 (≤7.5%) or less stringent HbA1c goals may be appropriate for some individuals
Blood Glucose (mmol/l)4 As recommended to meet individual treatment needs
- Pre-prandial 4-7
- Post-prandial (2 hours) < 10
Blood Pressure (mmHg)1,2 ≤140/80 At least 3 times a year
<130/80 may be appropriate for some (e.g. with HTN & high CVD risk, microvascula r disease, CKD, younger people with
Type 2 Diabetes)
Total Cholesterol (mmol/l)3 <4.5 As part of annual lipid profile
LDL Cholesterol (mmol/l)1,2 ≤2.5 primary prevention + statin At least once year. 4monthly if not in target.
≤1.8 secondary prevention + statin
HDL Cholesterol (mmol/l)1,2 ≥ 1.0 Men
≥ 1.3 Women
Triglycerides (mmol/l)1,2 ≤1.7
Urine Albumin:Creatinine (ratio)1,2 <2.5 Men On diagnosis, annually or at follow -up if raised before
mg/mmol < 3.5 Women
eGFR1,2 >60 On diagnosis, annually or at follow -up if raised before
Serum Creatinine 1 <150 On diagnosis, annually or at follow -up if raised before
Stage of CKD 1,4 Translate the renal results (ACR & eGFR) into the stage of CKD - see notes.
Liver Function Tests 1 On diagnosis or annually
HSE Model of Integrated Care for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes (2018)1, ICGP (2016) 2, HSE Diabetes Cycle of Care 2015 3, ADA 20194
Note: Target BGL may vary depending on local Endocrinologist policy.

Client Resources:
1. A form - My Diabetes Health Result Form (MDHRF) is available for use in 1 -1 care and SMES . It is available in the DISCOVER
Diabetes – Type 2 handbook for clients. It is available in 2 formats – one without client name, one with client name and DOB to
support people leaving with their GP /PN. In addition to clinical target information it includes other key information (i.e. DRS, foot
care and the HSE ‘My Medicines list’). See the support folder on Clinical Targets.
 The targets listed in the current MDHRF is in line with the targets presented above. Note Serum creatinine, stage of CKD and
liver function tests are not on the form and are presented here for reference. Note HbA1c targets of 53 are presented. In
practice it is important to consider and discuss HbA1c with groups and individuals in the context of individual goals i.e. ≤ 48
 A guidance document re how to use the MDHRF form and a Green Paper of Evidence were prepared in 2018 and are available in
the support folder/clinical targets/my diabetes health result form.
 The form was shared with the DESMOND WG to support exploration of how it could be integrated into DESMOND care, and
educators tested use of same. Work will continue on exploring potential use of this form.

2. Diabetes Passports. These are small booklets that are in use within some diabetes care teams e.g. CHO2, ECAD, CHO9. Check
with your local diabetes care team (e.g. acute, DNS, CDM team) what is in use in your area. It is important to check if the targets
used in the MDHRF are different to those in the passports and to consider if discussions are needed with local stakeholders
regarding updates, to avoid confusion for the person with diabetes at all times.
Written records of diabetes health results support care by informing people of their current diabetes care status, supporting the
education process, empowering the person to engage in their self -care and attend follow -up check -ups as recommended by
their d iabetes care team e.g. GP, PN, DNS, consultant and support their participation in review of future results.

FURTHER INFORMATION on Clinical Targets
HbA1c further information:
 ADA 2019 recommends HbA1c more or less stringent goals should be individualized and based on factors: duration of diabetes,
age/life expectancy, co-morbid conditions, known CVD or advanced micro -vascular complications, hypo unawareness, individual
considerations, resources/support system. See Figure 6.1 from ADA pS64 below. Frequency of testing should be based on
clinical situation, treatment regimen and clinician judgement.
 ADA EASD 2018 recommends 53 as the target for HbA1c and refers to the importance of atherosclerotic CVD risk management
or ASCVD risk.
 A metabolic memory or legacy effect has been demonstrated in which a finite period of intensive control has shown benefits
that lasted for decades after the control ended and so intensive HbA1c may yield enduring benefits. Thus striving for optimal
HbA1c may now be the target f or some, especially for the newly diagnosed as soon as possible after diagnosis and if adverse
effects can be avoided. (ADA 2019).
 ≤53 appropriate for most and shown to reduce dia betes related complications (NCP-DM, 2018). The ADA EASD 2018 refers to
this target offering benefit when the person is likely to have sufficient life expectancy to see microvascular bene fits (generally
10 years).
 ≤48 may be appropriate for select individuals if it can be achieved without hypos or adverse treatment effects (ADA 2019) – it
may be suitable for newly diagnosed without significant co -morbidities/CVD, diet, lifestyle an d/or met formin treated, those
with long life expectancy (ICGP 2016).
 ≤58 or less stringent may be appropriate for some (NCP-DM, 2018 ) – those unlikely to achieve longer term risk reduction
benefits (i.e. reduced or limited life expectancy), those with a history of hypoglycaemia or with a high risk of the conseque nces
of a hypo (e.g. risk of falling, those with reduced awar eness of hypos, those who drive or operate machinery as part of their
job), advanced complications (micro or macro), extensive co -morbid conditions, where social circumstances may prevent tight
blood glucose control.
 Clinicians are advised to exercise judg ement when interpreting results and be aware of the limitations of HbA1c which can
affect the true result. It is affected by conditions that affect red blood cell turnover (i.e. anaemias, recent blood transfu sion,
certain meds, pregnancy, CKD).
 HbA1c is not a measure of glycaemic varability or hypoglycaemia - though some clinicians have advised to consider the risk of
possible hypos in those with HbA1c lower than expected or within tight targets. A combination of review of SMBG and HbA1c
may be important for some clients e.g. those treated with insulin. The HbA1c may also inform the accuracy of a person’s meter.
 See Reference table to assist interpreting HbA1c levels with average blood glucose levels (ADA 2019).
Blood Pressure further information:
 ADA 2019 recommends all hypertensive people should monitor their BP at home. Its role in detecting white coat hypertension,
masked hypertension or other discrepancies between true and office BP and the role of home BP monitoring is highlighted. It
can confirm or refute diagnosis and monitor treatment. Studies have shown it may better correlate with ASCVD risk and
improve medicine adherence and thus help reduce risk. The Model of Integrated Care (HSE 2018) recommends 24hour blood
pressure monitoring if a blood pressure reading is high at the clinic visit. Not reported in ICGP 2016.
Lipids further information – the following was provided at the CROI Update on CVD – please discuss local practices :
 CROI 2018 Update on CVD – There was a move away from total cholesterol targets and no specific targets given for different
groups. The 2016 ESC/EAS Guidelines for management of Dyslipidaemia were referred to wit h the main guidance for people
with type 2 diabetes:
- in people with type 2 diabetes and CVD or CKD, and in those without CVD who are >40 years of age with one or more other
CVD risk factors or markers of target organ damage, the recommended goal for LDL is <1.8mmol/L and the secondary goal for
non HDL C is <2.6mmol/l and for apoB is <80mg/dl.
- In all people with type 2 diabetes and no additional risk factors and/or evidence of target organ damage, LDL <2.6mmol/l is
the primary goal. Non HDL <3.4mmol/L and apoB <100mg/dL are the secondary goals.
- LDL-C was discussed as t he main target for atherosclerosis. A UK speaker shared the move away from LDL and the use of non HDL which is obtained via a non-fasting sample.
 NICE and ICGP had very similar guidance re HbAc1 but not re lipids. NICE: of note the NHS implemented a health check initiative
which s upported CVD risk assessments which is not in place in Ireland. This s upported CVD 10year risk assessment
recommendations in management of CVD. NICE also highlighted TC and HDL as key lipid measures.

ACR & eGFR further information
 ACR – there is biological variability in urinary albumin excretion and ADA 2019 advises 2 of 3 tests need to be abnormal to
diagnosis albuminuria. ACR requires an early morning specimen and 2 out of 3 need to be positive over a 6 month period to
indicate nephropathy (IC GP 2016). This practically means when a result is high a person is advised to go to their GP to review
their result and to have a repeat ACR , to allow the GP to consider the result . It is important for clinicians to be aware of the
factors which can affect ACR including exercise within 24h, infection, fever, congestive heart failure, marked hyperglycaemia ,
menstruation and marked hypertension.(ADA 2019). Confirmation of a CKD diagnosis is by the GP or diabetologist.
 ACR and eGFR can vary within people over time and abnormal results should be confirmed to stage CKD (ADA 2019) . Diabetic
kidney disease is usually a clinical diagnosis made based on presence of albuminuria, and/or reduced eGFR in the absence of
signs or symptoms of other primary causes of kidney damage (ADA 2019). Signs of CKD may be present at diagnosis and reduced
eGFR without albuminuria has been reported in type 2 and is more common with the increasing prevalence of diabete s in the
USA. At any eGFR the degree of albuminuria is associated with risk of CKD progression, CVD and mortality (ADA 2019).

Guidance for the Individualization of Glycaemic Targets - ADA Figure 6.1 pS64

Average Blood Glucose Levels for specified HbA1c levels (ADA 2019 – Glycemic Targets S63)
HbA1c %
(mmol/mol)
Mean plasma
glucose
mmol/L
Mean fasting
glucose

mmol/L
Mean
PREMEAL
glucose
mmol/L
Mean
POSTMEAL
glucose
mmol/L
Mean
BEDTIME
glucose
mmol/L
(42)
7.0
(5.5–8.5)

5.5–6.49
(37–47)
6.8
(6.5–7.0)
6.5
(6.4–6.7)
8.0
(7.7–8.2)
7.5
(7.3–7.8)
6.5–6.99
(47–53)
7.9
(7.5–8.3)
7.7
(7.4–8.0)
9.1
(8.8–9.4)
8.5
(8.0–8.9)
(53)
8.6
(6.8–10.3)

7.0–7.49
(53–58)
8.4
(7.9–9.0)
8.4
(8.2–8.7)
9.8
(9.4–10.2)
9.8
(9.2–10.4)
7.5–7.99
(58–64)
9.3
(8.7–9.8)
8.6
(8.2–8.9)
10.5
(10.0–10.9)
9.7
(9.0–10.4)
(64)
10.2
(8.1–12.1)

8.0–8.5 (64–
69)
9.9
(9.1–10.7)
9.9
(9.3–10.6)
11.4
(10.8–12.0)
12.3
(10.9–13.8)
(75)
11.8
(9.4–13.9)

(86)
13.4
(10.7–15.7)

(97)
14.9
(12.0–17.5)

(108)
16.5
(13.3–19.3)

CLINICAL TARGETS FOR OLDER ADULTS (ADA 2019)
Clinical targets for non-pregnant adults with T2DM is presented in on page 17. The ADA now also recommend extra consideration is
given to older adults (65+ years of age). This is not reflected in current Irish guidelines – discuss current practice in local diabetes
care teams. Please see framework below in the table for considering treatment goals for glycemia, blood pressure, and
dyslipidemia in older adults (65+ years of age) with diabetes taken from Older Adults Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes, ADA
2019.
Older Adults: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes, ADA 2019 - Framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia, blood
pressure, and dyslipidemia in older adults with diabetes.
Person with diabetes
characteristics/health
status
Rationale Reasonable
A1C goal l‡
***Fasting
or
preprandial
glucose
***Bedtime
glucose
Blood
Pressure
Lipids
Healthy (few coexisting
chronic illnesses, intact
cognitive and functional
status)
Longer
remaining life
expectancy
<58 mmol/mol 5.0–7.2
mmol/L
5.0–8.3
mmol/L
<140/90
mmHg
Statin unless
contraindicated
or not tolerated
Complex/intermediate
(multiple coexisting
chronic illnesses* or 2+
instrumental ADL
impairments or mild-tomoderate cognitive
impairment)
Intermediate
remaining life
expectancy, high
treatment
burden,
hypoglycemia
vulnerability, fall
risk
<64 mmol/mol 5.0–8.3
mmol/L
5.6–10.0
mmol/L)
<140/90mmHg Statin unless
contraindicated
or not tolerated
Very complex/poor health
(LTC or end-stage chronic
illnesses** or moderate-tosevere cognitive
impairment or 2+ ADL
dependencies)
Limited
remaining life
expectancy
makes benefit
uncertain
<69mmol/mol 5.610.0mmol/L
6.111.0mmol/L
<150/90mmHg Consider
likelihood of
benefit with
statin (secondary
prevention more
so than primary
This represents a consensus framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia , blood pressure, and dyslipidemia in older
adults with diabetes. The person characteristic categories are gen eral concepts. Not every person will clearly fall into a particular
category. Consideration of individual and caregiver preferences is an important aspect of treatment individual ization. Additionally, a
person's health status and preferences may change over time.

*** Many conditions associated with increased red blood cell turnover, such as haemodialysis, recent blood loss or transfusion, or
erythropoietin therapy, are commonly seen in older adults with functional limitations, which can falsely increase or decrease A1C. In
these instances, plasma blood glucose and finger stick readings should be used for goal setting

‡ A lower A1C goal may be set for an individual if achievable without recurrent or severe hypoglycemia or undue treatment burde n.

* Coexisting chronic illnesses are conditions serious enough to require medicines or lifestyle management and may include arthritis,
cancer, congestive heart failure, depression, emphysema, falls, hypertension, incontinence, stage 3 or worse chronic kidney d isease,
myocardial infarction, and stroke. “Multiple” means at least three, but many people may have five or more.

** The presence of a single end -stage chronic illness, such as stage 3−4 congestive heart failure or oxygen -dependent lung disease,
chronic kidney disease requiring dialysis, or uncontrolled metastatic cancer, may cause significant symptoms or impairment of
functional status and significantly reduce life expectancy.

† A1C of 69 mmol/mol equates to an estimated average glucose of ∼11.1 mmol/L. Looser A1C targets above 69 mmol/mol are not
recommended as they may expose people to more frequent higher glucose values and the acute risks from glycosuria, dehydration,
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome, and poor wound healing.

7. POSSIBLE COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
The GP and practice nurse and DNS appointments (as required) , are a critical element to the proactive management of people with
diabetes to maximise the quality of their outcomes and reduce the risks of developing diabetes related complications. As par t of
one to one dietetic care and DSME group courses, the Commun ity Dietitian supports education on possible diabetes complications
and the recommended follow -up/check-ups to prevent, detect and treat these. Clients are referred and sign -posted to the
appropriate service as required e.g. DRS referral, recommend GP/PN/DNS appointment for review.

DIABETIC RETINOPATHY/ EYE CARE GUIDANCE AND DISEASE PREVENTION (MICROVASCULAR)

“Diabetic retinopathy is one of the most common causes of blindness in the working age population in Ireland and is one of th e
most common serious complications of diabetes. Up to 5% of patients with diabetes in Ireland may have sight-threatening diabetic
retinopathy. This sight threatening condition is preventable by early detection, through population based screening and treatment”
(HSE National Clinical Programme for Diabetes 2018).

The National Diabetic Retinal Screening Programme
“Diabetic Retina Screen which is part of the National Screening Service and Health Service Executiv e, is a quality assured
government-funded programme that offers, free annual diabetic retinopathy screening to people with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes
aged 12 and over. The aim of the programme is to reduce the risk of sight loss among people with diabetes b y the early detection
and treatment of sight-threatening retinopathy” (HSE National Clinical Programme for Diabetes 2018).

Screening
“Screening appointments last approximately 30 minutes during which dilating drops are administered to the eyes and speci alised
digital photographs are taken of the retina. The images are then reviewed and subsequently graded. If the images taken show t hat
further investigation and treatment is required, the participant will be referred to a Diabetic Retina Screen treatment clinic,
however most participants will have a normal result and will be re -invited for annual screening” (HSE National Clinical Programme
for Diabetes 2018).

Treatment
“Treatment for screen positive patients is delivered in one of the seven treatment clinics nationally. Treatment is delivered in line
with Clinical Practice Guidelines for Treatment Clinics.

A result letter will be sent within three weeks after the screening appointment advising of the next steps. Most people will have a
normal result. They will have no retinopathy or will have early changes to their retina and will be invited back for routine diabetic
retinopathy eye screening.
Patients will be contacted for a further appointment if:
• The photographs are not clear enough to give a result.
• You have diabetic retinopathy which needs to be assessed.
• Other eye conditions not caused by diabetes are detected and need to be assessed.

Follow up or further assessments of diabetic retinopathy that are recommended as part of the screening prog ramme are free of
charge” (HSE National Clinical Programme for Diabetes 2018).

The above information is taken from the Model of Integrated Care for type 2 diabetes, a guide for health care professionals
clinical management guidelines (2018) by the HSE National Clinical Programme for Diabetes.

Please see entitlements section for how to access brochures for the retina screening service, how a person can find out if they
are on the retina screening register and the possible options to support self-referral to the retina screening programme.

FOOT CARE GUIDANCE/ DISEASE PREVENTION (MICROVASCULAR)

“Diabetic foot disease is one of the most feared and costly complications of Type 2 diabetes. People with Type 2 diabetes are at
increased risk of foot ulceration and lower-limb amputation” (HSE National Clinical Programme for Diabetes 2018).

Incidence
“The annual risk of foot ulceration is 2.2% -7.0% in people with diabetes”(Jeffcoate WJ, Harding KG, 2003). “People with diabetes
have a 10 to 20-fold increased risk of lower-limb amputation compared to non-diabetic people” (Abbott CA et al 2002).

Monitoring
“Everyone with diabetes should have their foot examined at diagnosis and at annual review thereafter” (HSE National Clinical
Programme for diabetes 2018).

Classification of risk
“People with diabetes should have their feet examined and classified according to their risk of foot disease:
Low, medium, high or active foot disease” (HSE National Clinical Programme for Diabetes 2018).

The information above is taken from the Model of Integrated Care for type 2 diabetes, a guide for health care professionals
clinical management guidelines (2018) by the HSE National Clinical Programme for Diabetes.

Foot Care Patient Education
“Foot Care education improves the knowledge and behaviour towards foot care in the short term in people with diabetes. This
should encompass foot hygiene, the need for daily foot inspection, suitable foot wear, prompt treatment of new lesions and th e
importance of regular podiatric visits” (SIGN 2010).

It is recommended to be aware of local podiatry services in the local HSE area and services provided by local Diabetes Irelan d Care
Centres. It would also be beneficial to signpost the client to their practice nurse o r GP in their surgery for their annual foot screen as
recommended by the model of care for the diabetic foot (HSE 2012).

Resources to support foot care advice are available for those with low, moderate and high risk foot.
https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/hl/living/diabetes/foot%20care%20information%20leaflets.html

Further reading: Model of care for the diabetic foot (HSE October 2011):
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/

Please note the model of care for the diabetic f oot is due to be updated , however a s of January 2020 there has been no further
update.

Please also see entitlements appendix for further resources and entitlements regarding foot care.

NEUROPATHY (MICROVASCULAR)
“Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) is one of the commonest complications of Type 2 diabetes and may be present at time of
diagnosis. Diabetes can affect all nerves and so diabetic neuropathies are heterogeneous with diverse clinical manifestation s. They
may also be focal or diffuse, the most common diffuse neuropathy is the chronic sensory motor neuropathy (glove and stocking)
diabetic peripheral neuropathy and the most common focal neuropathy is carpal tunnel syndrome. DPN may be present at time of
diagnosis in over 10% of patients and may affect up to 50% of patients with long standing diabetes . 50% of diabetic peripheral
neuropathy may be asymptomatic but in 16% to 26% of patients with diabetes the neuropathy is painful” (Harkins, Smith and
Gleeson.2016).

Monitoring
“Patients should be examined for DPN from time of diagnosis and their feet should be examined annually for signs of periphera l
neuropathy” (Harkins, Smith and Gleeson, 2016). This is usually completed at diagnosis and as part of the annual foot screen as
referenced in the Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes (2018).

Treatment
“The first step is to aim for stab le and optimal glucose control” (Harkins, Smith and Gleeson 2016). It would also be beneficial to
signpost the client to their practice nurse or GP in their surgery for their annual foot screen.

NEPHROPATHY (MICROVASCULAR)
Diabetic renal disease is a glomerular disorder characterised by structural and functional changes, which may lead to proteinuria
and/or decline in kidney function. It may be progressive and result in end -stage renal disease, which may require renal replacement
therapy (dialysis or transplantation) (Waas JH, Shalet SM, 2002)
Please see Appendix on Chronic Kidney disease for further information on assessment and dietetic treatment of CKD.

ORAL HEALTH (MICROVASCULAR)
People with diabetes are susceptible to oral sensory, periodontal and salivary disorders which could increas e their risk of developing
new and recurrent dental caries. Several studies have reported greater history of dental caries in people with diabetes.
 Factors for caries development include poor control of diabetes control.
 People with diabetes have been reported to complain of dry mouth. A study detected impaired salivary uptake and
excretion in adults with type 2 diabetes. The cause is unknown but may be related to polyuria or to alterations in the
basement membranes of salivary glands.
 People with diabetes are more susceptible to opportunistic infections such as oral candidiasis. Fungal infections are
commonly found in adults with poorly controlled diabetes (Above referenced from Thuyumanavan et al 2015).

Treatment
Thuyumanavan et al (2015) suggest a good oral hygiene routine, regular visits to a dentist, eating a healthy diet and controlling
blood glucose levels will help reduce a client’s risk of poor oral health.

Resource: Diabetes Ireland and the Dental Health Foundation have also produced an information card on diabetes and oral health
for adults which can be given to clients with type 2 diabetes. This can be dow nloaded or can be ordered from D ental Health
Foundation Ireland. https://www.dentalhealth.ie/assets/files/pdf/diabetes_adult_postcard_final.pdf
You can find further information on entitlements with regard to oral he alth in the entitlements appendix of the care plan.

ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION (MICROVASCULAR)
“Moderate to severe erectile dysfunction affects approximately 5-20% of all men and is common in middle-aged and older men with
type 2 diabetes where it may affect up to 50% of patients” (American Diabetes Association, Clinical Practice Recommendations
2013; Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network 2010; National Institute for Cli nical Excellence 2009).

Treatment
The following are all beneficial in improving erectile function:
• reducing alcohol intake (see section on alcohol for further guidelines) ;
• increasing exercise (see section on physical activity for further guidelines)
• losing weight (see section on weight management for further information)
In addition counselling or stress management may help erectile function.

Signposting the person to their GP for a medicine review may also be beneficial as some medicine s can affect erectile
dysfunction.
This above information has been obtained from the HSE Model of Integrated Care for D iabetes 2018.

CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE (MACROVASCULAR)
The ICGP guidelines (2016) state that risk of cardiovascular disease is increased 2- 4 fold in patients with diabetes. It is the main
cause of death in Type 2 diabetes with excess mortality seen in all age groups, especially younger age groups.
The underlying pathology is usually atherosclerosis which develops insidiously over many years and i s usually advanced by the time
symptoms occur . The risk of myocardial infarction and stroke is two to five times higher than in the general population.
Peripheral vascular disease (PVD), defined as lower extremity arterial atherosclerosis, is a significant complication of type 2
diabetes. PVD, as with other manifestations of cardiovascular disease, is more common in individuals with type 2 diabetes tha n in
the general population (MacGregor st al 1999).
.
Monitoring
According to the ICGP guidelines (2016) the key to the management of complications is early detection and prompt intervention.
Therefore systematic screening for complications forms part of a diabetes integrated care programme including monitoring blood
pressure, cholesterol levels and blood glucose.
Further information on monitoring of these risk factors can be found in the section on clinical targets for adults with type 2 diabetes
in the care plan.
Treatment
Non-Pharmacotherapy
ICGP guidelines (2016) state that lifestyle modification focusing on the reduction of saturated fat, trans fat, and cholesterol intake;
increase of omega-3 fatty acids, fibre, and plant stanols/sterols; weight loss (if indicated); and increased physical activity should be
recommended to improve the lipid profile in people with diabetes.

The American Diabetes Association (2019) states that nutrition therapy that includes the development of an eating plan design ed to
optimize blood glucose trends, blood pressure, and lipid profiles is important in the management of diabetes and can lower the risk
of CVD, CHD, and stroke. Findings from clinical trials support the role of nutrition therapy for achieving glycaemic targets and
decreasing various markers of cardiovascular and hypertension risk.
Please see appendices on dietary recommendations for adults with type 2 diabetes and physical activity for more specific dietetic
information.
As the pharmacotherapy treatment is outside the scope of this care plan, further reading on this can be found in the follow ing
documents:
1. https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/model -of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf
2. ICGP A practical Guide to Integrated Type 2 Diabetes Care (2016)

NON ALCOHOLIC FATTY LIVER DISEASE (NAFLD)
NAFLD is Non Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease Is considered to be the liver manifestation of the metabolic syndrome, characterised by
excessive fat accumulation in the liver (Norris 2018). There is also a progressive form of NAFLD called Non Alcoholic Steatohepatitis
(NASH).
According to the EASL-EASD-EASO Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of NAFLD (2016), BMI and increased waist
circumference are positively related to the presence of NAFLD. Common comorbidities such as people with Type 2 Diabetes show a
higher prevalence of NAFLD and liver disease progression such as NASH.
Screening for NAFLD in the population at risk should be in the context of the available resources, considering the burden for the
national health care systems and the currently limited effective treatments.
The ICGP guidelines (2016) and the HSE Model of Integrated Care for Patients with type 2 diabetes (2018) recommends the GP
check LFT’s at a person’s initial assessment after diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. The HSE Model of Integrated Care (2018) also
recommends checking LFT’s at a person’s annual review. However it is important to note that Norris (2018) indicated that LFT’s may
be normal in 80% of NAFLD patients. Crosbie (2018) reports that there are also non invasive tests to identify those with NAFLD such
as fatty liver index, steato test or NAFLD liver fat score which GP’s can carry out. A liver ultrasound is the preferred option for those
at risk of NASH (Crosbie 2018). This is likely to be an area where we will see more research and guidance emerge for people with
type 2 diabetes over the coming years.
Treatment
Norris (2018) states that for people who have NAFLD and type 2 diabetes, the treatment of diabetes in consultation with the
diabetic team is important as well as the treatment of obesity through diet and lifestyle and/or bariatric surgery. Losing more than
10% weight can remove some fat from the liver and improve inflammation in your liver (Crosbie 2018). Norris and Crosbie (2018)
both describe lifestyle changes in NAFLD as being the foundation of any treatment plan and state that it is advisable to attend a
dietitian for guidance on this.

Further reading
1. “What everyone with diabetes should know about liver disease” Prof Suzanne Norris St James’s Hospital Presentation at
DICE 2018
2. EASL-EASD-EASO Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of non -alcoholic fatty liver disease (2016) Journal of
Hepatology vol 64: 1388-1402
3. “Non alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)” Dr Orla M. Crosbie Cork University Hospital presentation 6/6/20 18

8. DIABETES SEL F MANAGEMENT EDUCATION (DSME) & HSE Courses
 Diabetes Self-management Education courses involve face to face contact in group or individual one to one sessions with
trained educators. The role of virtual online sessions is being explored in 2020.
 A key component in self-management support for care of people with diabetes is Structured Patient Education (SPE). Evidence
based group education is often referred to as SPE and the standard s for same have been defined by NICE in 2003 and adopted by
the HSE in 2009. Courses have been referred to as SPE courses, but since 2018 in Ireland, are being referred to as diabetes
support courses when advertising to the public , to improve the understa nding of what the course is for the public and to
support better engagement with registration to attend. This will be explored further with public consultation.
 The HSE Model of Integrated care for Type 2 Diabetes suggests that within 3 months of being newly diagnosed with Type 2
Diabetes, people should receive a structured Type 2 Diabetes education package (i.e. X-PERT, DESMOND or CODE). In autumn
2019 the HSE DISCOVER DIABETES -Type 2 course was offered and in 2020 the DSME courses in Ireland includes DESMOND,
DISCOVER DIABETES – Type 2 and CODE. The package will give the person with diabetes appropriate dietetic input and advice
regarding their clinical care. Those not suitable for group will receive a one to one consult with a Dietitian. In dividuals and their
families/carers can register online at the link www.hse.ie/diabetescourses or by searching ‘Diabetes course’ . Courses can
facilitate people with diabetes being supported by different members of the multidisciplinary care team (e.g. Dietitian and nurse
educators, additional inputs from podiatrists, DNS, physiotherapists, mental health nurses, psychologists, health promotion
officers (physical activity, smoking), etc.).
 Courses are intended to be included within an ongoing model of edu cation and care, integrating life long learning, care planning
and optimisation of treatment.
 There are four critical time points when the need for diabetes education is required and th e A ADE7 Self -care bahaviours
provide a framework for identifying topics to include at each time (healthy eating, being active, monitoring, taking medicine ,
problem solving, reducing risk, healthy coping) ;
(1) At diagnosis,
(2) Annually for assessment of education, nutrition and emotional need,
(3) When new complicating factors arise (health conditions, physical limitations, emotional factors, or basic living needs) that
influence self-management,
(4) When transitions in care occur (Powers et al, 2015, ADA 2019). See summary in Diabetes SMES support folder.

 Structured diabetes education courses are beneficial and clinically effective for people with Type 2 Diabetes demonstrating
improvements in glycaemic control, weight loss, quality of life and reducing cardiovascular risk (Deakin et al, 2006; Lov eman et
al, 2008; Piatt et al, 2010; Deakin et al, 2006; Davies et al, 2008; Chrvala et al, 2016; Steinsbeck et al, 2012; Guo et al, 2014)

 The HSE carried out a review of SMES programmes and it was found the benefits of the programme include – increased
application by the individual of knowledge/understanding of diabetes, self-empowerment with the person effectively and
confidently participating in their own self-management, psychological adjustment to living with diabetes, improved undertaking
of diabetes self-management behaviours and improved clinical outcomes (HSE, 2009).

 The Health Technology Assessment (HTA) was carried out by the Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) in 2015 at the
request of the HSE to examine the clinical and cost effectiveness of generic self-management support interventions for COPD,
asthma, cardiovascular disease and diabetes (HIQA, 2015). This showed there is very good evidence that SMES , including
culturally appropriate education, can improve blood glucose control in people with Type 2 diabetes. This report also suggests
that diabetes self-management education programmes are cost-effective relative to usual care.

 A 2018 review reported, p eople who are empowered and skilled to self -manage thei r diabetes have improved health
outcomes. Over the past 20 years, diabetes self -management education programmes have been shown to be efficacious and
cost-effective in promotion and facilitation of self -management, with improvements in individuals ’ knowledge, skills, and
motivation leading to improved biomedical, behavioural, and psychosocial outcomes (Chatterjee et al, 2018) .

 The Community Nutrition and Dietetics SPE working group on Audit, completed a review of evidence on effectiveness of HSE ran
courses (X -PERT & DESMOND) in 2018. International and national evidence was reviewed. A summary of this evidence and a
database of evidence reviewed (as an excel workbook) is available for all educators, see on the next page.

 Self management group education has also been shown to be cost effective in people with Type 2 Diabetes (Jacobs et al, 2011).

 SMES should be provided to people with Type 2 Diabetes and ongoing support offered to include follow up (ADA 2019). When
group based education courses are offered, education on diet, lifestyle and explanation of clinical outcomes are discussed and a
follow up session should be offered within 6 months and ongoing review yearly (MOC, 2018).
From 2020 in Ireland there will be three programmes for people with type 2 diabetes that aspire to these standards . The HSE
DISCOVER DIABETES – Type 2 (Diabetes Insights & Self -Care Options Via Education & Reflection) and DESMOND (Diabetes
Education and Self -Management for On -going and Newly Diagnosed diabetes) courses, offered in primary care and facil itated by
Dietitians and diabetes nurses. CODE – Community Orientated Diabetic Education is offered by Diabetes Ireland.

Summary of evidence: Notes for table (* significant, NS – not significant, M = months).
X-PERT (Irish MSc 2007 & RCT 2006 & Audit data) DESMOND (RCT 2008 (new dx of diabetes), follow-up 3yrs 2012 &
real world 2018 & Irish research)
Weight loss:
↓2.5kg (3%) at 6M with 2 SPE follow up sessions at 3M & 6M
(Irish MSc)*.
↓ 0.5kg at 14M (RCT)* in the intervention group with no
follow-up sessions offered vs. ↑1.1kg for the control group.
↓3kg (3%) at 6M and 4.7kg (5%) at Y1 suggested in HSE Audit
data 2006-2016, but more follow-up data is needed.

Reduction in HbA1c (mmol/mol):
↓8 (14%)* in HbA1c at 6M (Irish MSc) . ↓5 (11%) NS at Y1.
↓ 6.6 (11%)* in HbA1c at 14M (RCT) vs. small ↑ for controls.
2018 X-PERT Health data: 4.2mmol/mol ↓ at 6M for n98.

↓4 (8%) at 6M and ↓4 (7%) at Y1 suggested in HSE audit data
2006-2016, but need more follow-up data.

Medication: 16% reduced meds (RCT) & 63% remained on the
same meds (RCT). N o significant increase in those taking
diabetes medication between BL and 6M (30% diet controlled).

Other benefits:
 Improvement in their ability to cope with diabetes and
feeling in control of looking after their diabetes *
 Improvement in having more freedom and enjoyment of
food *
 Improvement in diabetes knowledge* (Irish MSc & RCT)
 More than 9 out of 10 people (99%) said they enjoyed the
course and find it useful (Irish MSc)
Weight loss:
RCT 2008: Weight loss in both the intervention (INT.) group
(approx. 3kg/3%) and the control group (approx. 2kg/2%) with a
1.1kg* loss difference sustained at 12M in the INT. group. INT:
2.84kg (3%)* at 4M, NS at 8M and ↓2.98kg (3%) at Y1

3yr data 2012: NS difference between 2 groups in change from BL

↑% in the normal weight category (CHO3, 2020) (core+ follow-up
sessions attended)

Reduction in HbA1c (mmol/mol):
↓in both INT & control groups but NS (RCT 2008)
NS - 3yr 2012 (↓ in both groups sustained but NS differences)
↓ 10 (16%)* at 6M. ↓ 9 (14%)* at 1Y (2018 real world)
↓ 11 (18%)* at 3-6M. ↓ 3 (5%)* at 1Y (CHO2 2010)
↓ 11 (18%)* at 3-6M (CHO 2 2016)
↓ 8.25 (13%)* at 3-6M (CHO 3 2016)
↓ 6.8 (12%)* at 6M (CHO 3 2020) (core+ follow-up sessions
attended)
More follow up data is needed.

Other benefits:
 Reduction in smoking rates * (RCT) & ↓ depression score *
(RCT).
 ↑understanding of the seriousness of the condition and of their
ability to e ffect the course of the disease* but no difference in
depression (3yr follow-up 2012).
CODE (Diabetes Ireland - Evaluation 2007 & Audit Data)
Weight loss: ↓0.6kg* at 26weeks with follow-up support (call at 7weeks, 6M session).
HbA1c (mmol/mol): a reduction has been reported at 26weeks
Other benefits:
 Significant improvement in knowledge and psychosocial outcomes reported.

 DI Annual reports report improved empowerment, quality of life, diabetes knowledge, reduction in weight for some, positive
association with glycaemic markers and cholesterol with attendance (2013 -2017).
 DI 2019 Annual report reports significant increase in knowledge, quality of life, and weight loss post compared to pre programme
attendance. Non significant improvements are reported for blood parameters.

 HOW TO REFER TO DIABETES SUPPORT COURSES

 All health care professionals can refer people with Type 2 Diabetes to local courses through local HSE Community Nutrition and
Dietetic Services but also through the online service at www.hse.ie/diabetescourses

 People with diabetes can also self-refer at this link and are welcome to call HSE Live on 1850 24 1850 or 041 -6850300 who will help
a person register and/or email local team contacts on their behalf.

 People are welcome to bring a family member, carer or friend but to book a place for them. People are welcome to attend at any
location of their preference, anywhere in Ireland. People are welcome to attend the first session to see how it suits their needs.

Information on courses : see www.hse.ie/diabetes courses for information on available courses.

Diabetes Ireland Online Course – Diabetes Smart (01-8428118)
 Diabetes Ireland offer an online course called ‘ Diabetes Smart’. It consists of a series of short videos on various topics of living with
type 2 diabetes including: ‘what is diabetes’, ‘healthy eating’, ‘physical activity’, ‘ medicines’ and ‘diabetes complications’. While it
doesn’t replace face-to-face structured patient education courses, it is a useful educational tool which gives essential information to
people with type 2 diabetes, particularly those who are newly diagnosed. It may be most helpful for those individuals who are
unable to attend HSE courses. Follow this link to get access to this FREE online educational course. www.diabeteseducation.ie

FURTHER READING – Self Management & the HSE
HSE Living with a Chronic Condition: Framework for self management support
In 2017 the HSE launched th is framework which provides an overview of the rationale for self -management support; and sets out
how the HSE will implement self -management support for these four major chronic conditions, one of which is dia betes. Self
Management Support Co -ordinators were later employed in the HSE and in 2019 produced local directory of services to support
people with long term conditions. See the website for your local directory and the support folder Psychosocial care & support for
an example of the press release.
Diabetes Self-Management support is the systemic provision of education and supportive in terventions to increase a person’s
skills and confidence in managing their health problems, including regular assessmen t of progress and problems, goal setting and
problem solving support. It is an important element of person cen tred care, acknowledging people with Type 2 Diabetes as partners
in their own care, supporting them in developing the knowledge, skills and confid ence to make informed decisions
The majority of care for chronic conditions is provided and coordinated by the person themselves with the support of family
members and carers at home and in the community. A person with diabetes has on average 3 ho urs contact a year with a
healthcare team. They self -manage their condition for the remaining 8757 hours in the year, remembering to take their medicines,
trying to change behaviour, dealing with the effects on emotions and relationships and on the activit ies of daily living. There is
evidence that certain interventions which support self -management improve outcomes for people with diabete s – ranging from
quality of life and clinical outcomes, to reduced healthcare utilisation including hospitalisation.

Support for patient self-management is a key element of person centred care, one of the four domains of quality in Irish healthcare.
Principles of the self-management support framework
There are four overarching, evidence based principles of self-management support which underpin this framework.
1. People with Type 2 Diabetes should be seen as active partners in their healthcare.
2. Supporting self-management is inseparable from high quality care for people with long term conditions
3. Investment should be prioritised in those interventions for which there are good evidence of clinical effectiveness.
4. A whole system approach to implementation of self-management support should be taken (Framework for self-management)

Please follow this link for more information - https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/hl/selfmanagement/

Other Support - See Appendix - Psychosocial care & support. Link with HSE MDT colleagues and the local health promotion
department re other supports for self -management and support e.g. CVD Sub -group/Community Nurse initiatives.

9. ENTITLEMENTS for People with Type 2 Diabetes
Long term illness Card (LTI) - (no longer a booklet)
Everyone with Type 2 diabetes, regardless of income/circumstances is entitled to a Long term illness (LTI) book. All people with
diabetes are entitled to receive their diabetes medicines, pens/syringes lancets, blood glucose monitoring strips FREE of charge. You
will also be able to receive medicines for associated conditions such as cholesterol lowering and blood pressure medicine, if
prescribed. Many people with type 2 diabetes have not been aware of this entitlement.

This information is correct as of July 2019.
There has been some recent changes to the LTI scheme with regards to the following:

1. A new address for sending completed documentation to
The process for new and review LTI applications is centralised through the Primary Care Reimbursement Scheme rather than
through your Local Health Office. The new address is:
Long Term Illness Scheme, Client Registration Unit, PO Box 12962, Dublin 11, D11 XKF3.

2. A new form -There is a new form in use and old forms will no longer be accepted. A copy of the form can be found at
https://www2.hse.ie/services/long-term-illness-scheme/apply-for-a-long-term-illness-scheme-card.html

3. A new LTI card - LTI Cards will be issued going forward but existing LTI Books will remain valid for the time being.

4. Residency requirements - Applicants must be ordinarily resident i.e. live here and intend to live here for at least one year.

5. A new online express registration service for pharmacists to register people with certain conditions
For newly diagnosed people who are not yet on the LTI scheme there is a new Express LTI registration which can be completed
online by a pharmacist. Express LTI registration is for people with certain new diagnoses where the medicine prescribed confirms
the diagnosis. Diabetes Mellitus is one of these diagnoses. If a pharmacist registers the client using the Express LTI registration then
you must still submit your completed application form to the LTIS Client Registration Unit within two months to continue to get
medicine free.

6.For people who already have a LTI bo ok and the book is full, they can contact the LTI who will re -issue a new card in place of the
book.

List of all medicines which are included on the LTI scheme
 Alpha-glucosidase inhibitor – acarbose.
 Anti-hypertensives, including diuretics. Aspirin. Biguanides.
 Consumable items like sensors required for use with insulin pumps. Control solutions for use with meters.
 Dextrose gel.
 DPP-4 inhibitors, for example: • sitagliptin, • saxagliptin, and • vildagliptin. Glucagen hypokit.
 Injection swabs.
 Insulin needles and syringes.
 Insulins.
 Lancets.
 Lipid lowering drugs including: • statins, • fibrates • exetimibe.
 Liraglutide and exenatide injections.
 Nateglinide and repaglinide
 Sulphonylureas.
 Test strips including: • blood glucose test strips, and • urine test strips.
 Thiazolidinediones.
 Warfarin and new oral anticoagulants.

 Please also see list below - https://www2.hse.ie/services/long-term-illness-scheme/approved-medications.html
 Note meters are not included.
 More information can be found at - https://www2.hse.ie/services/long-term-illness-scheme/long-term-illness.html

Hypoglycaemia treatment In relation to hypo treatment following discussion with local pharmacist s and with HSE live (CHO 3 & 7),
Dextrose gel is approve d on the LTI medicine list (see above). Glucogel and glucojuice are also both covered under the LTI scheme.
The glucose sweets seem to have been removed in favour of the Glucogel and glucojuice. This information is correct as of July 2019
however this may change and therefore it is important to keep up to date and inform colleagues of any changes you are made
aware of. See Hypo Appendix for more information. In Sept 2020 this was reviewed by the Primary Care Pharmacist (CHO1), rep on
the NCP -Diabetes programme and the following was advised for clients ‘ A range of hypo treatments are ava ilable through your
pharmacy. I f your hypo treatment is prescribed by your GP or clinician it may be available un der the LTI scheme. Check with your
pharmacy what is currently available under the LTI scheme.’. It is best not to specify products as name s / strengths change. Where

a patient suffers hypos their consultant or GP can write a prescription for one of the glucose treatments , the pharmacist can upload
the prescription to PCRS on their software and seek approval online.

How people apply for an LTI book
Send a completed long term illness scheme application form (LTI form) to Long Term Illness Scheme, Client Registration Unit, PO Box
12962, Dublin 11, D11 XKF3. To qualify, you must be 'resident’ in the Republic of Ireland. This means that you are living here and
intend to live here for at least one year.
The person’s doctor or consultant will need to sign the form.
They will:
 confirm the condition
 list the medicine and any appliances the person needs to treat the condition.
You can log onto the HSE website to find more information and to down load the LTI application form - LoCall: 1890 252 919 or go
to www.hse.ie/LTI

*Please see correspondence from Anne Marie Hoey, Assistant National Director. Primary Care Reimbursement & eligibility which
outlines more information on the centralisation of the LTI scheme in the care plan folder on Entitlements.
Diabetic Retina Screening-annually (NRS)
Everyone with Type 2 Diabetes should have their eyes checked annually. The HSE National Diabetic Retinal Screening Programme
(Diabetic RetinaScreen) offers FREE, regular screening for diabetic retinopathy a complication that can happen from diabetes.
 For more information see http://www.diabeticretinascreen.ie
 People can check if they are on the eye screening register by
A) phoning 1800 45 45 55
B) Self-registration is also possible via the DRS website – once people complete the form, they are advised to print the
registration form and bring it to their doctor for signing.
https://apps.diabeticretinascreen.ie/diabetic-screening/public-registration.612.drsregistration.html
C) If you are a health care professional you can register a person with diabetes by phoning 1800 45 45 55 or see consent
form in entitlements folder. You can sign the health professional section of the consent form and allow the person
with diabetes to complete the form and return it themselves to DRS. It is advised to have copies of the DRS leaflet
available for people when discussing the form to support informed consent.
D) As a health care professional you can also register a person online or verify they are registered http://www.diabeticretinascreen.ie/health-professionals.24.html
 The locations list for screening has been updated and is on the website, this should be checked regularly for changes in
location.

Resources: An information leaflet can be downloaded from the website (throu gh link above) also for people with diabetes to be
used in clinic/group setting. A pictorial version is also available for those with literacy issues. A poster is available for use in
clinic/SPE.
You can download and order copies from www.healthbrochures.ie -search ‘retina’ (If ordering online, maximum order 50 leaflets)
 Local HPO for screening provided an information document on DRS in Spring 2019 to CHO 4 which is available to all. More
information on eye drops used can be found in the entitlements folder.

Support from NRS: NRS have been supporting SPE courses for years as part of an initiative between NRS & X-PERT SPE WG.

1. Screeners were informed of local courses by local Community Dietitian teams and use d posters and tear -off pads to promote
awareness of DSME core courses and follow -up courses (see the Recruitment Guidance for X -PERT for more info on the initiative).
Consider linking with local HPOs and screeners to support promotion of current DSME delivery by your team.
2. Health Promotion Officers for Screening (including Reti nal Screening) have attended SMES sessions to promote awa reness of the
service to people with diabete s and to answer queries. They have also supported local Community Dietitian team updates. The two
health promotion officers who can be contacted contact to discuss any issues are

 Aoife Collins PhD, Senior Health Promotion Officer, National Screening Service, BreastCheck Southern Unit, Infirmary Road,
Cork, T12 ET99, Tel: 021-4649720, Mob: 0866083672, Email: Aoife.collins@screeningservice.ie
 Lynn Swinburne, Senior Health Promotion Officer NSS Community Services, Tralee University Hospital, Rathass, Tralee, Co
Kerry, Tel: 0876876928, Email: lynn.swinburne@screeningservice.ie

Training - Diabetic Retina screening module: You can also log onto the health professionals section and complete the Diabetic Retina
screening module for Health Professionals.

Foot checks – at least annually
Every year your GP/Practice Nurse/ Podiatrist should carry out a foot screening examination on anyone with Type 2 Diabetes where
they test the feeling and the blood supply in your feet. From this test the person is classified as having low, moderate or high risk
diabetic feet.

-Those who have been classified as having a low or moderate risk diabetic foot, are over the age of 65 years and have a medical card
may be able to apply for a ‘Chiropody Card’. The availability of chiropody/ podiatry services and the chiropody card provided by the
HSE varies in different areas therefore it is best to contact your GP, ICP Senior Diabetes Dietitian or Clinical Nurse Specialist in
Diabetes in your area to find out further information. The chiropody card if available may entitle you a certain amount of podiatry
foot care treatments a year at a reduced price. To apply for this card, a form must be filled out by a person’s GP or practi ce nurse
and returned to HSE Local Health Office. If the chiropody card is granted, the amount of podiatry foot care treatments you are
entitled to with the card will be provided along with a list of the local private podiatrists who accept the chiropody ca rd. Please
follow the following link for more information on foot care.
https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health_services/care_in_your_community/chiropody_services.html
- For those who have been classified as having a moderate risk or high risk diabetic foot , the HSE holds a Foot clinic run by
podiatrists in HSE primary care centres. SERVICES CAN VARY THEREFORE LINK WITH SERVICES LOCALLY re local management of
moderate and high risk diabetes feet . Those who have an active foot ulceration should be seen by the hospital podiatrist. People
can only be referred to these clinics by their GP, nurse, podiatrist or other health care professionals.
Resources to support footcare advice are available for those with low, moderate and high risk foot.
https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/hl/living/diabetes/foot%20care%20information%20leaflets.html

Tax relief and podiatry services
Non-medical card holders may be able to claim tax relief on health services such as podiatry care if they are required to attend as
part of medical treatment and your doctor directs you to attend. You may also be able to claim tax relief on any doctor’s vis its and
prescription drugs associated with this care using the Med 1 form.

Dietary Financial support
There is no dietary sup plement but a person already receiving a social welfare payment may apply to their local welfare officer to
have a discretionary additional payment. For more information see
https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/social_welfare_payments/supplementary_welfare_sch emes/supplementary
_welfare_allow.html

In addition, a person may be able to claim Tax relief on foods used to treat hypoglyceamia or purchased as part of a dietary plan –
For more information see
https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/additional-diet-expensesfor-coeliacs-and-diabetics.aspx

Hypo treatment - Consider if the person is taking medicine that poses a risk of hypo and if they are eligible for support via the LTI re
treatment options.
Dental services
There are some dental services which people with Type 2 Diabetes are entitled to if they have a medical card under the Dental
Treatment Service Scheme. All medical card holders are entitled to specific dental treatments e.g. a dental examination, two filli ngs
in each calendar year, extractions as necessary.
 Additional treatments for example, teeth cleaning are available to those persons with specific medical conditions e .g. Type 2
Diabetes - the person’s dentist w ill be able to advise them of their entitlement if this is the case. The HSE dental section may
require written docu mentation outlining the person’ s medical condi tion and/or medicines from thei r G.P. or other relevant
medical person.
 Some treatments such as the provision of dentures require the approval of the HSE before the dentist can proceed and in this
case, the dentist applies directly to the HSE. At the end of the treatment the dentist will ask the person with diabetes to sign a
form certifying that the treatment detailed on the form has been received by the person and that he/she are willing to attend a
HSE dentist for examination if requested.
 The dental treatments available on the medical card may change from time to time.

Other information
The Treatment Benefit Scheme – this is run by the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection (DEASP) and provides
dental services to insured workers, the self -employed and retired people who have the required number of PRSI cont ributions.
Under this scheme, the Department pays the full cost of an oral examination once a calendar year. Since 28 October 2017, a
payment of €42 towards either a scale and polish or, if clinically necessary, periodontal treatment, is also available once a
calendar year. If the cost of either cleaning or periodontal treatment is more than €42, you must pay the balance - capped at
€15 for a scale and polish. There is no cap on the balance charged for periodontal treatment.

Treatment is provided by private dentists who are on the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection's panel. Lists
of dentists on the panel are available on welfare.ie . Most dentist s are on the panel, so you should not have any difficulty finding
one. The dentist will be able to check your eligibility and make a claim for you. The claim form will require details such as
your Personal Public Service Number (PPS number) , date of birth and signature. If you are a dependent spouse or civil partner,
you should give the PPS number of the insured person, who wi ll also be required to sign the claim form.

Private Insurance - Some private insurance companies like - DCARE offers additiona l dental treatments for people with
diabetes.
Resources - you can also find out more information on Diabetes and dental health i n these leaflets.

Information leaflet from Dental Care Ireland which can be downloaded: https://www.dentalcareireland.ie/dci2016/wpcontent/uploads/2018/09/DCI-Diabetes-Leaflet-WEB-2018-09-20.pdf

Information leaflet from De Care Dental which can be downloaded: https://www.diabetes.ie/wpcontent/uploads/2015/08/Diabetes-and-Oral-Health-Tips-and-Advice.pdf

Information post card on dental health and diabetes which can be downloaded or ordered by calling the Dental health foundatio n
on 01 693 0375 https://www.diabetes.ie/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Diabetes-and-Oral-Health.pdf

HSE Live team
The HSELive team are available to support clients who may have further queries regarding their entitlements. They can
be contacted by

Call Call save:1850 24 1850
Phone – 041-6850300
Monday to Friday 8am – 8pm.
Saturday: 10am -5pm
Live Chat You can contact the HSE Live team Monday to Friday 8am – 8pm.
Saturday: 10am -5pm
Twitter Send a message @HSE live team https://twitter.com/HSELive
Email Email your query by emailing hselive@hse.ie or via https://www.hse.ie/eng/hselive/
Find a
service
Log onto the following link to find a service https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/

HSE Your Service Your Say
Information on this service for is available at: https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/qavd/complaints/. All HSE staff need to be aware of
this service.

For the public - if you would like to make a complaint, comment or praise a service contact your service your say
https://www2.hse.ie/services/hse-complaints-and-feedback/your-service-your-say.html

Medical Cards and GP visit cards
Medical cards - https://www2.hse.ie/medical-cards/

GP Visit cards - https://www2.hse.ie/services/gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards.html

GP Visit card
If you have a GP visit card you don’t have to pay to see your doctor. You will have to pay for medi cines and other services.
If you have a medical card you do not need a GP visit card.

Who can apply?
Anyone can apply for a GP visit card. Applications for medical cards and GP visit cards are made through the same system. You will
first be assessed for a medical card. If you do not qualify you will be assessed for a GP visit card. You can apply through t his link
https://www.mymedicalcard.ie/

Over 70’s GP visit card
Everyone over the age of 70 years of age can get a GP visit card. You can register online or download a form and send to The
National Medical Card Unit, PO Box 11745, Dublin 11, D11 XKF3.
Please log onto https://www2.hse.ie/services/gp-visit-cards/over-70s-gp-visit-card.html to download the application from and find
out more information or Lo call 1890252919 to order one in the post.

Other INFO
For other information on other costs, schemes, allowances
- see the HSE website - https://www2.hse.ie/costs-schemes-allowances/
- www.revenue.ie;
- www.welfare.ie;
- http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/

10. HYPERTENSION & HYPERLIPIDAEMIA (CVD risk factors) – Summary of Dietary recommendations
Hypertension Hyperlipidaemia

 For people with blood pressure >
120/80mmHg weight loss and DASH style
dietary pattern are encouraged and include
lowering the following;

 Moderation of Alcohol Intake: Avoid
excessive alcohol consumption – 2 servings
per day in men and 1 serving per day in
women.

 Lowering Sodium Intake: Decrease salt
intake to less than 6g per day.

 Increase consumption of fruit & vegetables:
typically 5-7 portions per day, with ADA 2019
recommending between 8-10 per day.

 Aim to have low fat dairy: up to 3 servings
per day.

 Saturated fats should be limited
and replaced by unsaturated fats.
It is not recommended to replace
any reduction in energy from
saturated fat with refined
carbohydrate.

 Intake of trans fats from processed
foods should be avoided due to
their harmful effect.

 Eating pattern emphasising a diet high in
mono and polyunsaturated fats may be
considered to lower risk of cardiovascular
disease and can be effective as an
alternative to a diet low in total fat and high
in carbohydrates.

 Plants sterols and stanols are effective in
lowering LDL by 10% when 2g per day are
consumed in addition to diet &
pharmacological therapies. Note: Plant
sterols or stanols are not recommended for
primary prevention of CVD in Type 2
Diabetes.

 In people with type 2 diabetes
supplementation with Omega 3
PUFA is not recommended.

 Eating foods rich in long chain n3 fatty acids
such as fatty fish (EPA & DHA), nuts and
seeds (ALA) is recommended.

 Application of a Mediterranean diet or
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension is
recommended.

 30g of unsalted nuts per day has been
shown to reduce the risk of CVD by 30% but
it should be noted that energy intake of nuts
is high (ESC 2016)

 A high fibre intake lowers Total
and LDL cholesterol. 30-45g of
Fibre is recommended per day
preferably from wholegrain
products. An increase in viscous
fibre is recommended.

 Physical activity: 150 mins. of moderate activity over at least 3 days aiming not to have 2 consecutive
days without physical activity should be recommended. (See Appendix on Physical Activity).

 A 5% weight loss has been shown to be of benefit. (See Appendix on Obesity/Overweight).

*Further supporting information on DASH & Mediterranean diet, Fat (saturated, MUFA, PUFA, Trans fat, oily
fish & fish oil supplements) above can be found under Dietary Recommendations (see Appendix).

11. HYPOGLYCAEMIA – (addressing Management, ID, ICE, Driving Guidance)
Please see Appendix and support folder on Blood Glucose Monitoring and the support folder on Hypoglycaemia for further guidance
relevant to this section.

Hypoglycaemia is an acute complication affecting people with type 2 diabetes treated with insulin or insulin secretagogues (D UK,
2018) and individuals at risk for hypoglycaemia (hypo) should be asked about it at every encounter (ADA, 2019). Prevention is
preferable to treatment and attending structured education has been recommended (D U K, 2018). Individual glucose targets,
patient education, dietary intervention, exercise management, medicine adjustment, glucose monitoring and routine clinical
surveillance improve outcomes (ADA, 2019).

There is evidence of a prevalence of about 45% among people with type 2 diabetes (D UK, 2018). Changes in food intake, physical
activity and/or medicine can contribute. The Model of Integrated care for patients with type 2 diabetes (2018) core dataset includes
severe hypoglycaemia and impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia. The 4monthly and annual review visit assessment by a GP or PN
includes review of severe hypoglycaemia and hypo awareness (NCP-DM, 2018).

The ADA 2019 discusses recommendations in terms of 3 levels of classification of hypo
Level Glycaemic criteria/description Further details
1 3-3.9 mmol/L 3.9 has been recognised as the threshold for neuroendocrine responses to falling
glucose in people without diabetes. Because many people with diabetes
demonstrate impaired counterregulatory responses to hypo and/or experience hypo
unawareness, a measure of 3.9 is considered clinically important, independent of
the severity of the acute hypo symptoms.
2 <3.0 mmol/L This is the threshold at which neuroglycopenic symptoms begin to occur and requires
immediate action to resolve the hypo event.
3 Severe event characterised by
altered mental and/or physical
status requiring assistance
Requires assistance by another person to recover. Risk factors include age, race, older
adults with type 2 diabetes on insulin, those with poor or moderate vs good
glycaemic control, albuminuria and poor cognitive function.

 Hypoglycaemia can be frightening and inconvenient to people with diabetes. Symptoms can include shakiness, irritability,
confusion, tachycardia and hunger but are not limited to these. Level 3 may be recognised or unrecognized and can progress to
loss of consciousness, seizure, coma or death (ADA, 2019).
 The administration of rapid acting glucose or glucagon is required to reverse hypos.
 Hypos can cause acute harm to the person with diabetes and others, especially if it causes falls, motor vehicle accidents or other
injury.
 It has been suggested that among older adults with type 2 diabetes a history of level 3 hypo was associated with a greater level of
dementia (ADA, 2019).
 Those particularly vulnerable to hypos include: the elderly with type 2 diabetes because of their reduced ability to recognize
symptoms and effectively communicate their needs (ADA, 2019).

Hypoglycaemia Management (ADA, 2019; D UK 2018):
The goal of treatment is to immediately relieve symptoms and limit the risk of injury, while avoiding overtreatment.

1. TREAT - 15-20g glucose is the preferred firstline treatment for hypoglycaemia but 30g may be needed to treat a severe
hypo. 10g and 20g of oral glucose increase blood glucose by approx.2 and 5mmol/L respectively.
 The acute glycaemic response correlates to the glucose content of the food rather than the carbohydrate content.
 Sucrose is effective and may be more palatable than glucose e.g. sweets, sugar lumps, dissolved in water.
 Orange juice is considered to be less effective than oral glucose.
 Added fat and protein containing foods will not be as effective as glucose containing food/drink.
Response to glucose ingestion should occur within 10-20 minutes, when hypo symptoms should have resolved.

2. Retest blood glucose after 15 minutes and repeat treatment if blood glucose level has not risen above 4mmol/l. Depending on
individual needs and treatment, a follow -up snack providing 15 -20g carbohydrate may be necessary to prevent recurrent
hypoglycaemia.
3. Support people to understand the situations that increase hypo risk (such as fasting, when meals delayed, during after
consumption of alcohol, during and after intense exe rcise and during sleep), to consider their hypo cause and to share this with
their diabetes care team.
 Diabetes UK (2018): an individualised approach to hypoglycaemia management with appropriate monitoring is
recommended. One example of a strategy commonly recommended is: take 15 -20g of glucose; repeat treatment if blood
glucose level has not risen above 4mmol/l after 15 minutes; depending on individual needs and treatment, a fol low up
snack providing 15 -20g of carbohydrate may be necessary .
 The use of a bedtime snack in reducing the risk of nocturnal hypos is not routinely recommended, but may be considered
on an individual basis e.g. hypo unawareness, prior physical activity, al cohol consumption, presenting with night time
blood glucose levels close to 4.
 Hypo unawareness can severely compromise diabetes control and quality of life. Several weeks of avoidance of hypos has
been demonstrated to improve hypo awareness in many people with diabetes. Hence those with at least 2 clinically
significant hypos may benefit from at least short term relaxation of glycaemic targets. Discuss such cases with GPs.
4. The use of glucagon is indicated for treatment for people unable or unwilling to consume carbohydrate by mouth (ADA,2019).
Current guidance and practice in Ireland regarding prescribing glucagon kits for people with type 2 d iabetes who are insulin
treated or may require same , requires further review. Discuss local practices with local diabetes care teams.

TREATMENT

Hypo Rx 15g Glucose 30g Glucose
Examples  170ml Lucozade Original (new formulation) or
 5 Glucose or dextrose sweets (‘Lucozade Energy’
or ‘Dextro-Energy’ or ‘Lift’) or
 60ml Lift Glucose Juice Shot (formerly Glucojuice)

Note: 1 glucose tube (Glucogel) has 10g of carb.

 340ml Lucozade Original (new formulation) or
 9-10 Glucose or dextrose sweets (‘Lucozade Energy’
or ‘Dextro-Energy’ or ‘Lift’) or
 120ml Lift Glucose Juice Shot (formerly Glucojuice)

If pure
glucose
is not
available
:
 150ml fruit juice (e.g. 10g carb/100ml)
 3 teaspoons of sugar or
 1glass of fizzy drink (not diet) – check
carbohydrate content. (See support folder)
 300ml fruit juice (e.g. 10g carb/100ml)
 6 teaspoons of sugar or
 Fizzy drink (not diet) – check carbohydrate content
to calculate volume needed (See support folder)
Information in table correct as of August 2019.
 Remind people to check labels of all products as brands can change formulations at any time.

 Dietitian support: A summary of the carbohydrate content of current glucose containing products and some fizzy drinks is
available in the support folder on Hypos.
 Hypo Treatment & LTI: Some treatment is available on the LTI scheme – keep up to date with same – see Appendix on
Entitlements for more information on the LTI.
 Hypo guidance for people with type 2 diabetes: The Discover Diabetes –Type 2 Handbook includes information for people
with diabetes at risk of a hypo that is i n line with the current guidelines . This 3 page in formation is being prepared as a
resource to be available for all 1-1 and DSME and will be made available in the support folder when ready.

Further information on Glucojuice – rebranded to Lift Glucose Juice Shot in 2019
 Glucojuice: in an email from Diabetes Ireland sent on 3 rd April 2019, they advised that Glucojuice is a product more recently
available on the Irish market. It contains 15g glucose in 60ml making it an ideal hypoglycaemia management option. Glucojuice
contains 57 calories and is free from gluten, caffeine, artificial colouring, preservative and sweetener see
https://www.gogluco.co.uk/juice/ for further information.
 Lift Glucose Juice Shot: in an email from Diabetes Ireland sent on 28 th May 2019, it advised that Glucojuice will be relau nching
under the new brand name Lift. New product images will be available in early 2019. The only thing that is changing is the nam e.
ALL PIP codes, EAN’s and pack configurations are staying the same.
 It can now be prescribed and is available for people w ith diabetes under the Long Term Illness Scheme. This is because it is
classed as a supportive requirement at a reasonable cost to manage hypos.
 It is also available as an “over the counter” product from pharmacy outlets at a cost of €1.99. People with di abetes can claim tax
relief on this cost as part of their health expense annual return to Revenue or via www.revenue.ie .

ID: It is recommended to carry a form of identity such as engraved jewellery (necklace or bracelet). Identity bracelets are avail able
from Diabetes Ireland www.diabetes.ie/shop and most local pharmacies.

ICE (In Case of Emergency):
 People can add ‘ICE’ and the name of the person to be contacted in the case of an emergency to their mobile e.g. ICE Mary.
If they are involved in an accident or taken ill, this allows the medical personnel to check their mobile phone an d contact
this emergency contact. On a smartphone, there may be a « Medical ID » where you can store the name and number of
your emergency contact.
 An ICE card is an emergency card for a wallet or purse that contains the names and numbers of emergency co ntacts plus
important medical information. Diabetes Ireland (DI) has teamed up with Irish ICE Cards to increase the number of people
carrying these cards. The cost is €20 or 2 for €25. €5 is donated to DI for every card sold. The card can be ordered by
completing a form, online or phone ICE Card helpline on 087 -9777011 (days, evening, weekends). Contact : Connie
Danaher, Irish ICE Cards, Killimer, Kilrush, Co. Clare. Email : conniedanaher@gmail.com or www.irishicecard.ie. Flyers are
available to people with diabetes at 1-1 clinics or courses.

DRIVING GUIDANCE

 The RSA Medical to Fitness Guidelines were updated in August 2019 from April 2019 a nd are available in the
support folder on hypos and driving – print chapter 4 for guidance on diabetes.
https://www.ndls.ie/images/PDF_Documents/Slainte_agus_Tiomaint_Medical_Fitness_to_Drive_Guidelines.pdf

 People taking diabetes medicines which put them at risk of hypoglycaemia (insulin or sulphonylurea tablets) must take
extra precautions and must inform the National Driver Licence Service (NDLS).

 There is no need to notify the NDLS if diabetes is managed by diet alone, or by medicines which do not carry a risk of
inducing hypoglycaemia, unless diabetic eye prpblems occur, affecting visual acuity or visual field.

 Please see folder for further reading on driving and diabetes.

 Resource: The Diabetes and Driving leaflet to support people with diabetes has been updated ( dated April 2017)
and is available in the support folder on Hypos and Driving. Since March 2019, it is available to order directly
online from the RSA by setting up a health care professional account with them.

Practical Driving Guidance for People with Diabetes at risk of hypoglycaemia:

For those at risk of hypoglycaemia:

o Always CARRY your glucose meter and blood glucose strips with you.
o You must CHECK your blood glucose BEFORE driving and EVERY two hours whilst driving.
o IMPORTANT - Please make sure that your meter displays the correct TIME and DATE so that you have a record.
o Also, always CARRY personal identification to show that you hav e diabetes in case of injury in a road traffic
accident.
o If your blood glucose is 5.0 mmol/l or less, have a snack. If it is less than 4.0 mmol/l or you feel hypoglycaemic,
do not drive. Take appropriate action. Retest to ensure your blood glucose is above 5.1 mmol/l.
o If you develop hypoglycaemia while driving,

1. STOP your vehicle as soon as possible.
2. SWITCH OFF the engine, take the keys out of the ignition, and move from the driver’s seat.
3. DO NOT DRIVE again until 45 minutes after your blood glucose lev el has returned to normal. It takes up
to 45 minutes for the brain to recover fully.

o KEEP an emergency supply of fast -acting carbohydrate, such as glucose tablets or sweets, within easy reach in
your vehicle.
o Always take regular meals, snacks and rest periods at least every two hours on long journeys.
o Always avoid alcohol.

Car insurance:
 When diagnosed with diabetes an individual must inform their motor insurance company . Not informing your motor insurance
may mean you are at risk of driving without insurance and poses risk of non-coverage in the event of an accident.
 The insurance federation has agreed not to load premiums for diabetes. Diabetes Ireland is in partnership with ZURIC H and
ERM Financial Services offering competitive motor insurance c over. For further information see www.diabetes.ie or call
Diabetes Ireland on 01-8428118.

12. ILLNESS – SICK DAY GUIDANCE
Evidence
The Model of Integrated care (2018) has included illness/sick days as one of the topics that should be covered by the practice nurse
during the initial and review consultation with person with Type 2 diabetes. It is also included as one of the topics to be c overed by
the Dietitian over a series of ses sions, depending on the per son’s needs. The ICGP (2016) recommend that sick days are a key selfcare issue to be covered with a person as part of structured education programmes.
In terms of guidance specifics, current available references are from the ADA 2019 and guidance from Diabetes & Primary Care in
2018. There is no guidance in Diabetes UK 2018 regarding illness management/ sick day guidance and there are no
recommendations for DKA.
Guidance
The following summarises current guidance.
 Any condition leading to the deteriora tion in glycaemic control necessitates more frequent monitoring of blood glucose:
people with diabetes prone to ketosis also require urine or blood ketone monitoring. If accompanied by ketosis, vomiting,
or alteration in the level of consciousness, marked hyperglycaemia requires temporary adjustment of the treatment regime
and immediate interaction with the diabetes care team.
 The people with diabetes treated with noninsulin therapies or medical nutrition therapy alone may require insulin.
 Adequate fluid and caloric intake must be ensured. Infection or dehydration is more likely to necessitate hospitalisation of
the person with the diabetes than the person without the diabetes (ADA, 2019).

Diabetic ketoacidosis occurs in type 1 Diabetes and can occur in t ype 2 diabetes at times of severe illness or, rarely , in those on
SGLT2 inhibitor therapy. It requires urgent hospital admission. Signs of diabetic ketoacidosis include excessive thirst, poly uria,
dehydration; shortness of breath and laboured breathing, ab dominal pain, leg cramps, nausea and vomiting, mental confusion and
drowsiness, ketones can be detected on the person’s breath or in the blood or urine (Diabetes & Primary Care, 2018).

Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemias state (HHS) is potentially life threatening and requires urgent admission to hospital. Signs of HHS
include disorientation or confusion, polyuria, thirst and dry mouth, nausea and are typically seen after several days with gl ucose
levels consistently about 30mmols/L (Diabetes & Primary Care 2018).

The aims of managing a person with diabetes during intercurrent illness are to:
 Manage blood glucose levels
 Ensure adequate calorie intake and hydration with fluid replacement
 Test for and manage (if present) ketones
 Recognise when further medical attention required (Diabetes & Primary Care 2018)

Please note if a person is being treated for type 2 diabetes with insulin, education on ketone testing during illness may nee d to be
considered depending on the individual needs of the client.

General Guidelines during Illness

 Diabetes medicine taken as prescribed.
 Blood glucose levels should be checked more frequently if testing at home .
 Eat normally when possible and keep hydrated by sipping on water and sugar free fluids .
 If you are on insulin or tablets that have the potential to cause hypos and you are unable to eat it is important to avoid
hypos by taking carbohydrates in fluid form.
 Visit your GP if necessary. Talk to your pharmacist about suitable cold/flu remedies .
 Seek medical help if in any doubt or:
 Your glucose levels remain high >15mmols/l
 You are unable to eat
 You are vomiting of unable to keep fluids down
 Your temperature remains high
 Your glucose levels persist low-below 4mmols/L

Reference: Living well with Type 2 Diabetes, Diabetes Ireland (2016)

As of September 2020, ‘guidance for sick days’ for people with type 2 diabetes is currently being updated by the
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes.
HSE website information is available at: https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/coronavirus/diabetes-and-coronavirus.html

13. LANGUAGE

Evidence:
Diabetes Australia published their position statement in 2011 (Speight et al, 2012), followed by the UK adapting this work in the NHS
England ‘Language Matters’ document in 2018 (Cooper et al, 2018). The US made recommendations in 2017 (Dickinson et al, 2017)
on the use of language in diabetes care and education and in 2018 (Dicksinson, 2018) explored people’s experience with diabetes
related language.

 Further reading and information is provided in the folder on Language in the support folder which includes these references.
 A summary table discussing the words to consider and avoid using is available for reference.

Language in Diabetes Care and Education
Attention to language is now considered to be very important for all diabetes care health care professionals to reflect on, with
recommendations to use informative, empowering and an educational style.

Words are immediately shaped into meanings when people hear or read them , and those meanings can affect how a person views
him or herself. (Dickinson et al, 2017).

A person’s experience of diabetes can influence their self -talk for example ‘I am a bad diabetic ’. This can influence movement
towards behaviour change, which can be supported with positive self-talk.

Attention is advised in the language used by health care professionals
 when working WITH people with diabetes,
 when describing people with diabetes and their current diabetes status
 in the development of literature used to support their care and
 in professional audiences.

Attention to language is now recognised as key to providing person centred care (ADA, 2019).

5 key consensus recommendations re use of language include (Dickinson et al, 2017)

1. Neutral, non-judgemental, based on fact, actions, physiology or biology
2. Free from stigma – for example using non-compliant
3. Strength based, respectful, inclusive and imparts hope
4. Fosters collaboration between people with diabetes and providers
5. Is person centred – person with diabetes, no longer using ‘diabetic’

The use of empowering language can help to inform and motivate yet language that shames and judges may undermine this effort.

14. MEDICINES

A support folder on Medicines supports this section.

Practical points to educate and support clients with include

 Ensure people KNOW if they are taking medicine to treat diabetes, the name and brand
 How to take medicines – when to take, the amount/dose, how to take (e.g. with/without food/water)
 Possible side effects especially risk of hypo and thus be informed on hypo guidance and driving guidance
 Be aware of possible side effects
 To discuss unpleasant side effects with their diabetes team and any self -adjusted alterations to the dose
 If not taking medicines as presc ribed, it may not be possible to assess its effectiveness as part of treatment review – inform
their diabetes team of any changes they make in taking medicines.
 For advice, questions, concerns, talk to GP, PN, DNS, local pharmacist.

The American Diabet es Association (ADA) and the European Association for the study of Diabetes published ‘Management of
Hyperglycaemia in Type 2 Diabetes’ in 2018. Please see key guidance in Appendix 1 and 2 in support folder on Medicines.

Appendix 1 describes their new consensus approach to glucose lowering with medicines in type 2 diabetes.

The major change from previous guidelines is based on new evidence from cardiovascular outcome trials showing sodium -glucose
co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor s or glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists improve cardiovascular outcomes as well as
secondary outcomes such as heart failure and progression of renal disease in people with diabetes with established CVD or CKD.

Appendix 2 provides a list of glucose-lowering medicines and therapies available and specific characteristics that may guide
individualized treatment choices in non-pregnant adults with type 2 diabetes.
 Vitamin B12 is recommended to be checked annu ally for those treated with met formin – see Appendix on Dietary
recommendations – section on micronutrients.

Appendix 3 My Medicines List (HSE, 2019). Encourage poeple to complete and carry with them. KNOW that you are using, the right
medicine, the right way, CHECK your medicines and keep a list, ASK your healthcare professional if you’re unsure.
 In 2019, the HSE National Quality Improvement Team ‘National Medication Safety Programme’ developed this leaflet to
support people with using their medicines. The leaflet is in the support folder and can be downloaded from
www.safermeds.ie and through local pharmacies.
 The campaign was launched in July 2019 with circulars to all HSE staff in September to be part o f the campaign and
participate in World Patient Safety Day on 17 th September. (Appendix 6).
 A support for health care professionals was made available in Sept. 2019 – key messages for people promoting Know,
Check, Ask (Appendix 7)
 The use of the word ‘medicines’ instead of ‘medications’ was recommended following their work in developing this leaflet.
 A website www.safermeds.ie is available for health care professionals and the public with lots of information and video s for
support.
 This team are currently addressing the WHO 5 moments for medication safety and how to incorporate same into the
current message.
 The SPE course handbook of the HSE Discover Diabetes – Type 2 course, includes a copy of the leaflet in addition to
guidance on the long term illness scheme. It is proposed to make this available as a resource to support Type 2 Diabetes.
Appendix 4 World Health Organisation’s 5 Moments for Medication Safety. When starting a medication, taking a medication, adding
in a new medication, reviewing medication and stopping medication.
Appendix 5 Fish oil supplements & Medication - Guidance from Pharmacists on interactions of fish oil supplements with
medicine is available in the Medicine folder.
 See Hypoglycaemia section if risk of hypoglycaemia with medicines prescribed. If experiencing any problems or
unpleasant side effects to discuss with GP to consider review and if alternative available.

 See Diabetes Remission section for information regarding medicine adjustment for low-carbohydrate diets.

 See Entitlements section for information on the Long Term Illness Book (LTI) to support people with their
entitlements for free medicines.

15. MINORITY ETHNIC GROUPS and supporting cultural needs
Our culture is such an integral part of our life and often we are unaware of its influence on our thinking, behaviour, attitudes, which
can lead to difficulties when we communicate and support those from other cultures (Gable, 2007). Ireland today is a multicu ltural
society and dietitians need to consider how services can meet people’s diabetes care needs. Attention to how we communicate can
help. Consider social rituals, appropriate introductions, names (how to pronounce, write), explaining your role and purpose, if
others attend the appropriateness of what is discussed, use of language, boundaries, cultural specific non -verbals, talking about
food. Many cultures have customs associated with food that may be based on moral values, health, social, religious or spirit ual
needs. Customs around food preparation, cooking and eating are many and varied (Gable, 2007).

Culturally appropriate health education is more effective than usual health education to people from ethnic minority groups.
The following points should be considered for 1:1 and/or group interventions:
o Face-to-face interventions are more effective than tele-communication
o A combination, of both group and individual education sessions , is likely to have the greatest effect in most ethnic minority
groups.
o Teaching/counselling of activity change using culturally appropriate activities e.g. dancing and walking.
o Attendance of family member to elicit home based support.
o Use of visual aids to tailor low literacy needs. (DUK 2018)

HSE Interpreter Service: It is imp ortant to consider how to support an individual’s need and how to support those that wish to
attend group or 1-1 and if a combination of care may work best. There are various arrangements through the HSE for sourcing and
booking interpreters. Obtain appro val from your manager to book an interpreter, link with local interpreter agency as per HSE areas
service level agreement to arrange face to face or telephone service you require.

Dietitians can reduce language barriers by improving their cultural competency, addressing health literacy, and ensuring
communication with language assistance (ADA 2018). See resources section for additional information.

Special considerations – Ramadan:
Those people with Type 2 Diabetes classified in the very high and high risk groups are being advised not to fast which includes;
 people with sustained poor glycaemic control including severe hypoglycaemia,
 hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic coma or unexplained ketoacidosis within 3 months prior to Ramadan.
 people with a history of recurrent hypoglycaemia and/or unawareness, acute illness,
 people with CKD stage 3 or higher , advanced macrovascular complications and/or comorbid conditions that present
additional risk factors.
 people receiving treatment with drugs that may affect cognitive function including multiple dose or premix insulin
therapy
 Elderly with ill health.
People taking sulphonylureas or insulin will need to make adjustments to dose and/or timings to reduce the risk o f hypoglycaemia
and SMBG is recommended. Fasting should be interrupted if BG values are under 3.9mmol/l or above 16.7.
Newer GLD including basal insulin analogs are associated with a lower risk of hypoglycaemia and may be pref erable for using during
Ramadan (IDF 2017).
Structured education programmes should provide advice relating to diet, activity and medicine management during fasting to
reduce the risks of acute complications and to lessen weight gain. (DUK 2018)

Resources:
Diabetes UK – provide resources in other languages and diabetes books e.g. Carbs and Cals World Foods www.diabetes.org.uk/other_languages;
https://shop.diabetes.org.uk/collections/diabetes-books/products/carbs-and-cals-world-food
 Diabetes Ireland: “Self Care Guide for People with Diabetes” in different languages to include: Chinese, French, Polish,
Romanian, Russian is NO LONGER UP TO DATE (Personal Communication, Diabetes Ireland May 2019).
 Additional information to support dietitians in 1:1 & DSME is available in the following document “HSE, Minority Ethnic Groups:
A Nutrition Resource for Dietitians & Heal th Professionals” January 2010. HSE Emergency Multilingual Aids have been developed
to enable healthcare professionals to ask direct questions using the se aids to further support their consultation with different
ethnic minority groups. https://www.hse.ie/services/ema
 HSE Health Services Intercultural Guide : responding to the needs of diverse religious communities and cultures in healthcare
setting (April 2009) – provides guidance on food and content of medicine relevant for each.
https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/socialinclusion/interculturalguide/interculturalguide.html
 HSE Guidance and support - https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/primarycare/socialinclusion/intercultural -health/
 Intercultural health strategy 2018-2023, launched Jan 2019 - https://www.publichealth.ie/news/external-news/hse-launchessecond-intercultural-health-strategy
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/primarycare/socialinclusion/intercultural -health/intercultural-health-strategy.pdf
The HSE Intercultural Strategy provides a comprehensive and integrated approach to addressing the many unique, health and
support needs experienced by the increasing numbers of HSE service users from diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds and who
live in Ireland. With over 200 languages spoken in Ireland, this supports understanding where people are coming from.

16. OBESITY, OVERWEIGHT & WEIGHT MANAGEMENT

1. CLINICAL ASSESSMENT

 Carry out anthropometrical measurement (in agreement with the person); weight, height, BMI.
 BMI cut off points are slightly different for Asian, Ethnic South and Central American populations due to a higher risk of
Cardiovascular disease and Type 2 Diabetes at lower levels of BMI. (SIGN 2010, NICE 2012, NICE 2013)
 Measure waist circumference (WC), as appropriate (for those with BMI ≤35kg/m 2). Apart from the identification of
cardiovascular risk, WC can identify the degree of fat accumulation in the liver and pancreas, which drives the development of
Type 2 Diabetes in many cases ( Taylor et al, 2005). Addressing WC has the ability to improve glycaemic control and the
potential to induce Diabetes remission in a proportion of people with Type 2 Diabetes
 Of note, BMI is not an accurate predicator of the degree of adiposity in older people (≥65yrs) due to reduction in body height
and changes in body composition during aging (ESPEN 2018, IDF 2013). There is increasing evidence that in terms of metabolic
risk, mortality, cardiovascular and function, the distribution of body fat may be more important th an the amount per se (ESPEN
2018). In such people there is an increased value is using waist circumference as a measure of risk (in BMI ≤35kg/m2).

BMI

Waist circumference cut off points

White European & Sub-Saharan
African populations
Men ≥94cm (37inches)
Women ≥80cm (31.5inches)

Asian, Ethnic South & Central
American populations
Men ≥90cm (35inches)
Women ≥80cm (31.5inches)

For overweight or obese adults with Type 2 Diabetes, reducing energy intake to achieve weight loss should be the primary
nutritional management strategy (DUK, 2018). Weight loss of 5% or more significantly improves HbA1 c, total cholesterol, LDL
cholesterol, triglycerides, blood pressure and insulin sensitivity.

2. GUIDANCE
 Approaches to weight loss should be individualised.
 It is the degree of consistency of behaviour change that predicts the outcome of weight loss rather than the type of dietary
strategy. People should be supported in following the approach that suits their p references and lifestyle best and that they are
most likely to adhere to (DUK, 2018). Diets that provide the same caloric restriction but differ in protein, carbohydrate an d fat
content are equally effective in achieving weight loss (ADA, 2019).
 Interventions should be high intensity and focus on diet, physical activity and behavioural strategies to achieve a 500 750kcal/day energy deficit.
 People should be encouraged to practice self-monitoring techniques , including recording of weight, food intake an d physical
activity to increase their likelihood of maintaining weight loss.
 Long term support and follow up of people who achieve short term weight loss should be available to ensure it is maintained.
 The importance of the long term maintenance of behaviours employed in the weight loss phase should be discussed fr om the
outset so that the person clearly understands that if such behaviours are not sustained, there is a strong likelihood of weight
regain.
 For those who are motivated to address their weight as part of their overall d iabetes management, weight loss expectations
should be discussed. Unrealistic expectations result in a loss of motivation and lead to unsatisfactory outcomes if not addr essed
from the outset.
 The initial goal of weight management is to stop the trajectory of further weight gain (NICE, 2014). For some people, avoidance
of further weight gain will be an appropriate target.

White European & Sub-Saharan
African populations
Asian, Ethnic South & Central
American populations
Description
Less than 18.5kg/m2 Less than 18.5kg/m2 underweight
18.5-24.9kg/m2 18.5-23kg/m2 Normal weight
25-29.9kg/m2 23-27.5kg/m2 Increased risk
≥30kg/m2 ≥27.5kg/m2 High risk

Degree of weight loss required What works
~5%  Modified macronutrient profile
 Healthy eating
 Mediterranean diet
10-15% Multicomponent lifestyle interventions (high intensity)
Partial meal replacements
>15% Very low energy diets (<800kcals/day)
Total meal replacements (800-1200kcals/day)
Approximate values only – devised by Cathy Breen, 2018

Weight management for those over 60 years of age

 For those over 60 years of age , who are overweight, avoidance of weight gain may be considered a success ( Model of Integrated
care 2018)
 If weight loss is to be considered in ol der overweight or obese people (age 65+), it must only be done after careful weighing of
the risks and benefits. If considered,
o there should only be a moderate energy restriction (~500 kcal/d less than estimated needs and maintaining a minim um
intake of 1000-1200 kcal/d)
o targeting a weight loss of 0.25-1 kg/week (~5-10% of initial body weight after six months or more) and
o assuring a protein intake of at least 1 g/kg BW/d and
o an appropriate intake of micronutrients
o combined with physical exercise where possible
o to bring about a slow weight loss in order to preserve lean body mass.
 Weight loss, whether intentional or not, enhances the age -related loss of muscle mass, and consequently increases the risk of
sarcopenia, frailty, functional decline, fractures and malnutrition.
 Strict dietary regimens, like diets with very low energy intake (<1000 kcal/day), are strongly discouraged in the older popul ation
due to the risk of developing malnutrition and promoting functional decline (ESPEN, 2018).

3. DIABETES REMISSION

Definitions

Partial remission - Hyperglycemia below diagnostic thresholds for diabetes of at least 1 year’s duration with no active pharmacologic
therapy or on-going procedures

Complete remission - normal glycemic measures of at least 1 year’s duration with no active pharmacologic therapy or ongoing
procedures

Prolonged remission - Complete remission of at least 5 years’ duration (ADA, 2009)

Buse et al, Diabetes Care, 2009

 Complete remission can be achieved with significant weight loss (~15kg), with the effects being more pronounced earlier in the
disease. Individuals who have diabetes of longer duration should be supported in their weight loss efforts however if this is
something they wish to pursue.
 The concept of a “personal fat threshold” should be expl ored with people of lower BMI s. This offers the hope that even at
lower levels of BM I, weight loss can result in nor moglycaemia in a certain cohort of people . People with recent onset Type 2
Diabetes could regain normal glucose c ontrol and normal ß -cell function when the fat content of the liver and pancreas is
reduced by weight loss (Lim et al, 2011, Taylor, 2013).
 Type 2 Diabetes is a clinical consequence of the accumulation of excess weight in ectopic sit es by susceptible individuals (Steven
et al, 2016).
 Recent work done in the DIRECT trial showed that with a 12 week total diet replacement programme of ~800kcals per day ,
followed by a structured food reintroductio n and regular follow in people with ≤6year duration of Type 2 Dia betes up resulted
in 46% of participants achieving and maintaining complete Diabetes remission after 1 year, and 36% mai ntaining remission at 2
years. (Lean et al, 2019).
 Achieving and maintaining weight loss is the dominant factor behind remission of Typ e 2 Diabetes, and as with other studies
weight loss maintenance remains a challenge . People require on-going support to help them achieve and maintain weight
loss. Of note not all people who achieve 15kg weight loss will achieve remission. Work on this trial demonstrates that of those
who maintained a 15kg weight loss at 1 year 86% achieved complete remission. Of those who maintained this weight loss at 2
years 70% remained in remission (Lean et al, 2019). The key is maintenance of the 15kg weight loss.

Remission in the DIRECT study was considered having an A1c below 48mmol/mol (6.5%) without diabetes medicine. Results at
12months showed that:
 Those who lost 5kg had approximately a 1 in 3 chance of remission
 Those who lost 10-15kg, had about a 1 in 2 chance of remission
 Those who lost 15kg or more, had nearly a 9 in 10 chance of remission

 If people wish to pursue such interventions, they should be supported in doing so in a safe and collaborative way. They should
be advised to also seek the support of their GP or DNS to aid in the adjustment of medicines which may be required with major
alterations in their n utritional intake and also with weight loss. Note: not everyone is suitable for the diet e.g. those with
active or previous history of disordered eating, not medically stable, reduced kidney function, at risk of malnutrition.
 It is important to consider the individual’s microvascular complications before embarking upon major dietary change. If there is
no retinopathy, or only early changes then no additional precaution is required other than an annual screening. However, if
moderate or more severe retinopa thy is present then arrangements should be made to re -screen the eyes within six months of
achieving a substantial improvement in blood glucose control. The reason for this is that the sudden normalisation (reduction )
in retinal blood flow associated with the return of normal blood glucose control can disadvantage areas of the retina in areas of
marginal circulation with resulting deterioration in retinopathy. This effect is entirely restricted to individuals with pre -existing
moderate or worse retinopathy (Arun CS, Pandit R, Taylor R. Diabetologia 2004).

Further information:
The Community Nutrition and Dietetics SMES working group on weight management completed a review of evidence on Diabetes
remission in 2018. International and national evidence was reviewed. A summary of this evidence (as an excel workbook) and all key
papers are available for all. The Discover Diabetes – Type 2 course includes summary guidance on the implicatio ns of this research to
people with diabetes. It is proposed to make this available as guidance for all 1-1/SMES.

Key reference information
 Position Statement https://www.pcdsociety.org/news/details/acbd-and-pcds-release-joint-position-statement-onremission-of-type-2-diabetes
From DIRECT Research Team – Roy Taylor and Mike Lean
 https://www.directclinicaltrial.org.uk/
 https://www.ncl.ac.uk/magres/research/diabetes/reversal/#publicinformation and Info for Doctors (2020) and papers

17. OLDER ADULTS
Older Adults are generally defined according to a range of characteristics including: chronological age, change in social role and
changes in functional abilities. Most developed world countries have accepted the chronological age of 65 years as a definition of
'elderly' or older person (WHO, 2002). Diabetes UK 2018 guidelines referenced below have not defined what they classify as an
older adult. ADA 2019 and ESPEN 2018 guidelines have classified older adults as 65+ years of age. The IDF, 2013 have classified older
adults as 70+ years of age.

Refer to self-management education
 Diabetes self -management education and on-going diabetes self -management support are vital components of
diabetes care for older adults and their caregivers (ADA, 2019).
 Age should not restrict access to structured education and self -management, as education has been shown to be effective
in older adults (Diabetes UK, 2018).
 Self-management knowledge and skills should be reassessed if an individual’s functional abilities diminish or when regimen
changes are made (ADA, 2019). Please see Appendix on Self Management Education on Support for additional
information.

Nutrition and Physical Activity Guidance
 There is some evidence that the older person with diabetes may have poorer nutritional status than those without DM, both in
community and hospital (Diabetes UK, 2018).
 Diabetes in the aging population is associated with reduced muscle strength, poor muscle quality and accelerated loss of muscle
mass, resulting in sarcopenia. Inadequate nutritional intake, in particular inadequate intake of protein, can increase the risk of
sarcopenia and frailty in older adults. Diabetes is recognized as an independent risk factor for frailty, optimal nutrition with
adequate protein in combination with ae robic and resistance exercise are crucial in the management of frailty in older
population diagnosed with diabetes (ADA 2019).
 Older people with diabetes should be routinely screened for malnutrition with a validated tool in order to identify those with
(risk of) malnutrition.(ESPEN, 2018). Assessment of nutritional status and nutrition support for those who maybe malnourished
should be available to all older adults with diabetes and overseen by a dietitian (Diabetes UK, 2018). Malnutrition and risk of
malnutrition in older people with diabetes should be managed according to the recommendations for malnourished older
persons without diabetes mellitus (ESPEN, 2018).
 An older adult residing in an long term care facility may have irregular and unpredictable meal consumption, undernutrition,
anorexia, and impaired swallowing. Furthermore, therapeutic diets may inadvertently lead to decreased food intake and
contribute to unintentional weight loss and undernutrit ion. Diets tailored to a person 's culture, preferences, and personal goals
may increase quality of life, satisfaction with meals, and nutrition status (ADA, 2019) . People with diabetes residing in long -term
care facilities need careful assessment to establish glycaemic goals and to make appropriate choices of glucose-lowering agents
based on their clinical and functional status (ADA, 2019). Diabetes education should be considered for the staff of long -term care
facilities to improve the management of older adults with diabetes (ADA, 2019).
 To decre ase the risk of malnutrition developing in older pe rsons with diabetes ESPEN 2018 guidelines recommend to avoid
restrictive diets.
 In case of obesity and weight management in older people with diabetes please refer to respective recommendations in the
Appendix on Obesity/weight management.
 Nutritional management of older adults with diabetes should be person centred and individual

For additional relevant or other supportive information, see Appendices e.g.
- Dietary recommendations for adults with type 2 diabetes
- Physical activity
- Clinical Targets
- Psychosocial care & support for diabetes, including Stress
Evidence - The above guidance is taken from recent recommendations from ADA, 2019, Diabetes UK, 2018 and ESPEN, 2018
guidelines.

FURTHER READING – OLDER ADULTS:
 In addition to these guidelines above further guidance is provided by ESPEN 2018 for adults 65+ years of age, see below Table 1.

 Also, the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) developed global guidelines for managing older people, classified as those 70+
years of age diagnosed with Type 2 Diabetes in 2013.

In these guidelines three main categories, namely general, functional independent, functionally dependent were developed for
older people diagnosed with diabetes as a basis for clinical decision making.

Please see below for a detailed explanation of each category (Table 2) and a summary of these nutritional guidelines in Table 3
and exercise guidelines in Table 4.

Table 1: Summary of recommendations 54 - 60 from ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition and hydration in geriatrics (classified as
65+), (ESPEN 2018)
Recommendation Grade of
recommendation
GPP strong
consensus (%
agreement)
54 In overweight older persons weight-reducing diets shall be avoided in order to
prevent loss of muscle mass and accompanying functional decline.
95%
Commentary Experts generally agree that there is usually no need for overweight older people to
lose weight as meta -analyses indicate that mortality risk of healthy older people is
lowest in the overweight range. Further, weight loss, whether intentional or not,
enhances the age-related loss of muscle mass, and consequently increases the risk
of sarcopenia, frailty, functional decline, fractures and malnutrition. Moreover, the
common weight regain after a weight -reducing diet is predominantly a regain in fat
mass and not in l ean mass. Thus, repeated phases of weight loss and regain, called
“weight cycling”, might contribute to the development of sarcopenic obesity (the
presence of reduced muscle mass together with excess fat mass). Therefore, and to
avoid a progress to obesity , maintaining a stable body weight is considered
desirable for overweight older adults. A combination of a balanced, nutrient -rich
diet providing adequate amounts of energy and protein, and physical activity, if
possible even exercise, is a sound strategy to keep weight stable and to prevent
obesity.

55 In obese older persons with weight-related health problems, weight-reducing diets
shall only be considered after careful and individual weighing of benefits and risks

100%
Commentary Obesity, especially severe obesity (BMI 35 kg/m2), increases metabolic and
cardiovascular risk as well as the risk of mobility limitations and frailty in older
persons, particularly when marked muscle loss has already occurred. Current
expert recommendatio ns regarding weight reduction in older people primarily
refer to cases of obesity that are associated with comorbidities and obesity -related
adverse health effects. In these cases, positive effects of intended weight loss on
orthopaedic problems, cardiovascular and metabolic risk, insulin sensitivity, chronic
inflammation and functional limitations have been reported, partly in combination
with physical exercise. On the other hand, as weight loss in older persons may have
harmful effects due to the loss of lean mass (see commentary to recommendation
54), the decision for or against weight reduction shall always be taken at the
individual level. It should be based on a careful weighing of possible risks and
benefits of the intervention considering functional resources, metabol ic risk,
comorbidities, person’s perspective and priorities, and estimated effects on his or
her quality of life. If decision is made against weight reduction, it is advisable to aim
at weight stability and avoidance of further aggravation of obesity.

56 If weight reduction is considered in obese older persons, energy restriction shall be
only moderate in order to achieve a slow weight reduction and preserve muscle
mass.

95%
Commentary If weight reduction is considered to be beneficial, it has to be approached with
great care . Interventions working in young adults cannot simply be extrapolated to
older populations with low muscle mass and frailty. To avoid loss of muscle mass
and to ach ieve a slow weight reduction in older persons, the dietary intervention
should consist of a balanced diet as generally recommended for older adults, with a
maximally moderate caloric restriction (~500 kcal/d less than estimated needs and
maintaining a minimum intake of 1000-1200 kcal/d) targeting a weight loss of 0.25 1 kg/week (~5 -10% of initial body weight after six months or more) and assuring a
protein intake of at least 1 g/kg BW/d and an appropriate intake of micronutrients.
Strict dietary regimens, l ike diets with very low energy intake (<1000 kcal/day), are

strongly discouraged in the older population due to the risk of developing
malnutrition and promoting functional decline.
57 If weight reduction is considered in obese older persons, dietary int erventions shall
be combined with physical exercise whenever possible in order to preserve muscle
mass.
100%
Summary of commentary As it is of utmost importance for obese older persons to avoid loss of muscle mass
while losing their excess fat mass, dietary interventions shall be combined with
structured, supervised physical exercise whenever possible, in addition to an
increase in ev eryday physical activity. Before starting an exercise intervention,
health status and physical performance level of the person with diabetes needs to
be evaluated to exclude contraindications for exercise training and to identify the
optimal starting level and exercise type in order to ensure a safe and successful
training.

Older people with diabetes mellitus shall routinely be screened for malnutrition
with a validated tool in order to identify those with (risk of) malnutrition .
95%
59 In older people with diabetes mellitus restrictive diets shall be avoided in order to
prevent malnutrition and accompanying functional decline.
100%
60 Malnutrition and risk o f malnutrition in older people with diabetes mellitus shall be
managed according to the r ecommendations for malnourished older persons
without diabetes mellitus.
100%
Commentary to
recommendations 58-60
To decrease the risk of malnutrition developing in older persons with diabetes we
recommend to avoid restrictive diets. These diets have lim ited benefits and can
lead to nutrient deficiencies . In case of obesity in older people diabetes we refer to
the respective recommendations provided elsewhere in this guideline (see
recommendations 55-57). In case of malnutrition in an old er person with diabetes
we recommend to follow the sam e guidelines as for older adults without diabetes.
The use of oral nutritional supplements or use of tube feeding can result in a rise of
the glucose levels. However, prevention and treatment of malnutrition with its
probable negative short -term outcomes are regarded more important than
possible long-term complications of hyperglycemia.

Table 2: International diabetes federation managing older people with Type 2 Diabetes global guidelines – Functional categories of
older people with Diabetes (classified as those 70+ years of age) (IDF, 2013).
GENERAL
General guidance in specific clinical areas where it is expected that certain minimum standards of care should apply irrespective of
age, co-morbid status, and presence of particular issues such as frailty or dementia
CATEGORY 1: FUNCTIONALLY INDEPENDENT
This category is characterized by people who are living independently, have no important impairments of activities of daily living
(ADL), and who are receiving none or minimal caregiver support. Although diabetes may be the main medical problem, this categ ory
includes those who have other medical co-morbidities which may influence diabetes care.
CATEGORY 2: FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT
This category represents those individuals who, due to loss of function, have impairments of ADL such as bathing, dressing, o r
personal care. This increases the likelihood of requiring additional medical and social care. Such individuals living in the community
are at particular risk of admission to a care (nursing) home. This category includes a range of functionally dependent older people
with diabetes. Two groups require special consideration:

Subcategory A: Frail
These individuals are characterized by a combination of significant fatigue, recent weight loss, severe restriction in mobili ty and
strength, increased propensity to falls, and increased risk of institutionalization. Frailty is a recognized condition and accounts for up
to 25% of older people with diabetes.
Subcategory B: Dementia
Individuals in this sub -category have a degree of cognitive impairment that has led to significant memory problems, a degree of
disorientation, or a change in personality, and who now are unable to self-care. Many will be relatively physically well.
Recommendations in both these sub -categories reflect the emphasis on person safety, poor self -management ability, high risk of
and susceptibility to hypoglycaemia and unacceptable hyperglycaemia and their consequences, changing glycaemic goals, higher risk
of hospitalization, housebound or aged care home environment, and reduced life expectancy. Recommendations may include
relaxing glycaemic goals, simplifying regimens, use of low -risk glucose lowering agents, providing family/person education, and
enhanced communication strategies.

Table 3: Nutrition recommendations - International Diabetes Federation managing older people with type 2 diabetes (classified
as those 70+years of age), global guidelines (IDF, 2013)
Recommendation on NUTRITION
General All older people should have a nutritional and biochemical assessment at diagnosis, on admission to an aged
care home, and as part of the annual review.

The nutrition plan should be individualized and consider the person’s food preferences, eating routines, religion
and culture, and physical and cognitive health status.

The meal plan should include a variety of foods to ensure essential vitamins, minerals, protein, and fibre are
consumed in adequate amounts.

Medicine administration times must coincide with meal times if the individual is on insulin or sulph onylureas to
reduce the risk of hypoglycaemia.

People with swallowing difficulties should be identified and referred to a speech therapist if available
Functionally
independent
Functionally independent people with diabetes should be encouraged and assisted to achieve and maintain a
healthy body weight.

A consistent amount of carbohydrate should be provided at each meal.

The meal plan can include sugar in moderate amounts but excess sugar, soft drinks and fruit juices should be
avoided.
Functionally
dependent
Encourage the consumption of adequate amounts of fluid to avoid dehydration especially in hot weather.
Education and training are essential to enable healthcare professionals and caregivers to provide nutritional
support.
Sub-category A:
Frail

The nutritional assessment should be used to identify the presence of mal nutrition and/or weight loss and the
appropriate nutritional plan to be adopted.
Higher protein and higher energy intake foods may be needed to improve nutritional and functional status in
frail older people with diabetes.
Sub-category B:
Dementia
Healthcare professionals and caregivers should identify actual and potential eating difficulties.

Caregivers should provide support at mealtimes to ensure that agitation is managed and meals are consumed .
End of life Feeding tubes or intravenous (parenteral) nutrition may be needed to meet nutritional needs. The individual,
family, and caregivers should be involved in decisions relating to nutritional support with respect of advance

directive and ethical issues.
Additional
Commentary
While weigh t, BMI, and waist circumference should be documented as part of overall risk assessment, the
institution of weight loss programmes in older people should be carefully considered not only because of limited
data with regard to improving outcomes, but also b ecause of concerns about potential harms of weight
reduction

Table 4: Exercise recommendations - International Diabetes Federation managing older people with type 2 diabetes (classified as
those 70+years of age), global guidelines (IDF, 2013)
Recommendation on EXERCISE
General Older people with diabetes should be encouraged to be as active as their health and functional status allow.
A risk assessment should be undertaken before recommending an activity programme.
Timing and type of activity s hould be considered in relation to the medicine regimen, especially glucose
lowering agents associated with an increased risk of hypoglycaemia.
Functionally
independent
Encourage functionally independent older people with diabetes to exercise to targets recommended for all
adults with diabetes. (See Appendix on physical activity)
Functionally
dependent
Encourage a low intensity home -based exercise programme to improve p hysical performance and maintain
ADL and mobility.
If available, a physiotherapist should be consulted to assist those who are housebound or confined to a bed
or chair to undertake exercise to build arm and leg strength and flexibility.
Sub-category A:
Frail

Provide light -resistance and balance training to improve physical performance, lower limb strength, and
prevent further deterioration in functional status.
Sub-category B:
Dementia
Educate family members and caregivers on the safest effective mainten ance exercises that individuals can
undertake.
End of life care Encourage some form of exercise consistent with the person’s capability and health status

18. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

Physical activity & exercise have numerous benefits in type 2 diabetes includin g improving blood glucose, cardiovascular risk factors
& well being.

1. Discuss Physical Activity and agree personalised targets, bear in mind the National Physical Activity Plan (Healthy
Ireland, 2016) on www.getirelandactive.ie and other guidelines, as appropriate.
2. Encourage structured exercise: The FITT principle (below) can be used as a guide to help determine the level and type of
activity. For people who are sedentary the focus should be on establishing a regular pattern of low-moderate intensity
activity before moving onto working towards increasing the duration of activity and finally if appropriate the intensity of the
exercise.
3. Encourage people to consider how long they spend in sedentary behaviours in a day and/or over a week.
4. Encourage the client to increase activities of daily living.

The FITT Principle (Model of Integrated Care, 2018)
FREQUENCY 3-5 days per week. More frequent exercise is desirable, but care should be taken to first establish a regular exercise
habit before recommending levels that may not be sustainable.

INTENSITY to avoid musculoskeletal injuries and promote compliance, star t at a low to moderate intensity and gradually progress
over the course of several weeks or months to more vigorous efforts (if desired by the person). Emphasis should be on increasing
duration rather than intensity, with the goal of optimising caloric expenditure.

TIME 30-60 minutes, using a gradual progression. Multiple short bouts (10 minutes) produce similar benefits as a single long bout of
the same duration.

TYPE low-impact activities (e.g. walking, cycling, low -impact aerobics, water exercise) th at are convenient, accessible, and perceiv ed
as enjoyable by the person.

Recent Evidence and Recommendations
• General Physical Activity guidelines for Adults in Ireland recommend 150 minutes or more of moderate intensity aerobic
activity per week . More r ecently the ADA recommends that m ost adults with type 2 diabetes should engage in 150
minutes or more of moderate -vigorous intensity aerobic activity per week (can be done in bouts of 10 minutes), spread
over at least 3 days/week, with no more than 2 conse cutive days without activity. Shorter durations (75mins/week) of
vigorous intensity or interval training may be sufficient for younger and more physically fit individuals (ADA, 201 9).
• 2-3 sessions/week of resistance exercise on non-consecutive days is recommended (ADA, 2019).
• Older adults are recommended to participate in muscle strengthening, flexibility and balance training 2-3 times/week (e.g.
Yoga and tai chi) (National Physical Activity Plan for Ireland, 2016; ADA, 2019).
• Daily sedentary behaviour should be reduced. Prolonged sitting should be interrupted every 30mins for blood glucose
benefits particularly in adults with type 2 diabetes (ADA, 2019).
• Physical activity or exercises in isolation are not effective strategies for weight loss unless 60m ins/day is undertaken.
Evidence is conflicting as to whether a combination of diet and physical activity or exercise results in greater weight
reduction than diet or activity alone. Independent of weight management, physical activity & exercise have numero us
benefits (Diabetes UK 2018).
• Special considerations are required for individuals with CVD, uncontrolled retinopathy and severe neuropathy (Chapter 4,
ADA 2019).
• Studies show it is safe for individuals with Type 2 diabetes who are treated by diet alone or in conjunction with oral
hypoglycaemic agents, to exercise in both the fasting and post-meal state, with the most beneficial effects on blood
glucose levels observed post-prandially when blood glucose levels have more potential to reduce (Diabetes UK, 2018).
• For individuals treated with insulin or insulin secretagogues, care should be taken to minimise the impact of
hypoglycaemia which can occur up to 24 hours after physical activity (Diabetes UK 2018). For individuals on these
therapies (e.g. insulin/ insulin secretagogues), added carbohydrate should be ingested if pre-exercise glucose levels are
<5.6mmol/l (ADA, 201 9).

Services and Supports – link with local health promotion departments, physical activity health promotion officers and local sports
partnerships for more information on local supports and services. Check services on www.getirelandactive.ie;
www.getirelandwalking.ie and www.parkrun.ie. Consult local Self-Management Support Directory (published 2019).

19. PRE-PREGNANCY PLANNING AND PREGNANCY CARE FOR WOMEN OF CHILD-BEARING AGE

 With increasing numbers of women around the world developing Type 2 diabetes and doing so at a younger age, and with
women in many cultures tending to delay starting a family, the issue of Type 2 diabetes (T2DM) complicating pregnancy has
become increasingly important.
 Diabetes is the most common medical problem in pregnant women and is associated with less satisfactory outcomes for the
mother and infant when compared with people without diabetes , with an increased risk of congenital malformation, perinatal
morbidity and mortality in the offspring.
 In type 2 diabetes the situation is made worse by the fact that the women are often older, more obese, of non -Caucasian
background, are frequently of higher parity and are more likely to have chronic hypertension and be treated with medicines
associated with congenital abnormalities. (HSE, 2018)

 Planned pregnancies greatly facilitate preconception diabetes care (HSE, 2018) . To minimize the occurrence of congenital
malformations, standard care for all women with type 2 diabetes who have childbearing potential should include:
1. Education about the risk of malformations associated with unplanned pregnancies and poor metabolic control , HbA1c target (less
than 48mmol/l), blood glucose and testing targets and hypoglycaemia prevention and treatme nt.
2. Education on the use of effective contraception at all times, unless the person with diabetes is in good metabolic control ( i.e.
HbA1c less than 48mmol/mol) and actively trying to conceive
3. The possibility of pregnancy should be discussed at each diabetes consultation
4. All women with diabetes who are contemplating pregnancy should be advised to plan their pregnancy and be referred to a
secondary care diabetes centre.
5. Medical and diabetes review to include possible changes to diabetes medicines / insulin, review of medicines to avoid potentially
teratogenic agents and to check for and treat possible complications of diabetes.
6. Women with diabetes in pregnancy should be offered care by a specialised diabetes obstetric multidisciplinary team (HSE, 2010)

PRE-CONCEPTUAL CARE is associated with significantly improved pregnancy related outcomes, lower rate of congenital anomalies,
earlier ante-natal booking with lower HbA1c at booking and reduced premature deliveries.
Dietetic aims of Pre-Conceptual Care:
1. Optimise glycaemic control prior to conception HbA1c
2. Taking and continuing high dose folic acid (5mg) until the 12 th week of pregnancy and 400micrograms thereafter.
3. Weight loss for women who have a BMI above 27kg/m2 to achieve an appropriate weight
4. Ensure the diet is well balanced to meet nutritional requirements for this life stage.
5. Education and action planning on lifestyle factors including regular physical activity, avoiding alcohol and smoking and
appropriate food safety.

CARE DURING PREGNANCY - If your client with type 2 diabetes presents to an appointment/SPE and informs you they are pregnant:
1. Support them to attend their GP, diabetes service and maternity service straight away.
2. Advise them take 5mg of folic acid each day for the first 12 weeks of pregnancy
3. All pregnant women in Ireland should take a supplement containing 10micrograms (400iu) Vitamin D per day in addition to
inclusion of Vitamin D rich foods such as fortifi ed milk and oily fish. (HSE/Institute of Obstretricians & Gynaecologists, Nutrition
During Pregnancy – Clinical Practice Guidelines Nov 2019). Of note, the majority of over the counter prenatal multivitamins contain
10 micrograms of Vitamin D3, therefore i f a woman chooses to take a prenatal vitamin she will not require additional Vitamin D
supplementation. Women who choose a strict vegetarian or vegan diet are advised to take a supplement in form of ergocalcifero l
(vitamin D2).

Hyperglycaemia during preg nancy is associated with adverse outcomes and women with diabetes require MDT expertise to
optimise glycaemic control. Recommendations include:
 Individualised dietary advice to promote adequate nutritional intake and achieve optimal glycaemia appropriate f or gestational
age (HSE, 2010)
 Monitoring weight to ensure appropriate weight gain during pregnancy based on pre pregnancy BMI.
 Moderate physical activity of 30mins per day in uncomplicated pregnancies.
 Taking a vitamin D supplement (10micrograms) as recommended for all pregnant women.

Alcohol – in Sept. 2019, the HSE launched a campaign on Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders advising no amount of alcohol at any
stage of pregnancy is safe (See support folder for HSE staff communication).

RESOURCES:
1. A 2019 leaflet on Guidance on ‘Pregnancy Planning and Diabetes’, produced by the Irish Maternity Di etitians Group, is available
in the support folder.
2. HSE website: Current link - https://www2.hse.ie/pregnancy/ and https://www2.hse.ie/my-child/ – it may be changed with
developments. The HSE website on diabetes, due in 2020, will address type 2 diabetes and pregnancy.
3. Curriculum Guidance for DSME diabetes courses. See support folder on Pregnancy.

20. PSYCHOSOCIAL CARE & SUPPORT FOR DIABETES, including STRESS
EVIDENCE
 Diabetes has behavioural, psychological and social impacts and demands high levels of self -efficacy, resilience, perceived control
and empowerment (Hendrieckx C, 2016).
 Managing the emotional and mental health impact of diabetes is now recognised as key to supporting a person to self -care
for diabetes and to reduce the risk of complications.
 Emotional and mental health problems or psychological problems, such as diabetes distress and depression are common and
associated with suboptimal self -management, diabetes related complications, reduced quality of life and increased health -care
costs.
 Good psychological well-being and quality of life is an important outcome in its own right.
 Assessment of psychological (emotional well-being and mental health) and social situation should be included as an ongoing
part of the medical management of diabetes (ADA 2019) as they can impair an individuals’ or families ’ ability to carry out
diabetes care tasks and thus compromise health status .
 Working in a person centred way, using the e mpowerment approach and person centred active listening skills helps to discover
areas that pose a challenge for people .
 The diabetes health care professional has an important role in discussing emotional and mental health concerns affecting those
with diabetes. Guidelines to support clinicians have been lacking until the 2016 handbook publication on diabetes and emotional
health by the Mental Health and Diabetes National Development Programme in Australia (Diabetes and Emotional Hea lth – a
practical guide for healthcare professionals supporting adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes ). These guidelines have been
adapted by the NHS, UK in 2019. See the support folder for the NHS 2019 copy.
 It is recommended to consider the life course considerations associated with living with diabetes e.g. ADULTS (women of child
bearing age, changes in family support, chronic pain, low socio -economic groups), OLDER ADULTS (mild cognitive impairment or
dementia in those over 65y, needs of the older adult). (ADA, 2016).
 Psychosocial care or health addresses 1) emotional health and well-being and 2) mental health.

1. Emotional health and well -being affected by diabetes can result in diabetes distress (DD) (also referred to as diabetes
burnout whic h is more sustained distress) and require ongoing exploration for people with diabetes. Proposed to affect 1/6
people with non -insulin treated diabetes and 1/5 people with insulin treated diabetes. (Hendrieckx C, 2016). DAWN2 study
reported significant DD was reported by 45% though only 24% reported that their health care teams asked them how diabetes
affected their lives (ADA 2019).
2. Mental health conditions or psychological disorders include: anxiety, depression, disordered eating, serious mental ill ness,
suicide risk and require evaluation.
It is recommended older adults (≥ 65y) are screening for cognitive impairment and depression (ADA, 2019).

 Current evidence and guidance for further reading is available in support folder/Psychosocial Care & Support in ‘2019 Evidence
Review Psychosocial care and Support’ .

SUPPORTING PSYCHOSOC IAL CARE AND SUPPORT IN CONSULTAT IONS AND SMES

1. Facing life with diabetes can be different for everyone, with different reactions to the diagnosis which can raise a range of
emotions that will effect how a person will cope and self -manage. Listen and assist the person and assure them you can support
them to live well with diab etes. Consider the questions you use to support asking a person how they are coping with the
diagnosis. (Hendrieckx et al , 2016).

Asking how a person is coping with the diagnosis of diabetes. Here are some examples of open -ended questions you might use to
enquire about how the person is coping with the news that they have diabetes:
• ‘How are you feeling at the moment about the news that you have diabetes?’
• ‘How did you react when you were told you had diabetes?’
• ‘How do you feel your diabetes may impact on your [school/work/personal relationships/ family/sport/hobbies etc.]?’
• ‘How do you feel about telling other people that you have diabetes?’
• ‘How did your [close family members] react when you told them a bout the diagnosis?'
•‘How do you feel you are coping?’ – ‘What do you foresee will be the hardest thing for you in fitting diabetes into your life?’ –
‘What do you think will be easy for you to do/change?’ – ‘What do you think may be more difficult?’

Acknowledging the daily challenges of living with diabetes and the efforts it takes to manage the condition can help people feel
more comfortable about sharing their thoughts and feelings. You can do this by prefacing these op en-ended questions. For example:
 ‘Many of the people that I see find living with diabetes challenging’ or
 ‘Finding out you have diabetes can be a lot to take in’ – comments like these ‘normalise’ the adjustment process and help the
person to realise they are not alone in thinking or feeling this way.
 Explain that incorporating diabetes into their life takes time, for example, ‘Living with and managing diabetes is a learning process,
quite a bit can feel like ‘trial and error’. Over time, you will become an expert in managing your dia betes’.

2. Consider and explore levels of coping skills living with diabetes , irrespective of how long a person has diabetes for.

Consider and explore day to day stresses . Informal verbal enquiries can assist assessment e.g.
‘What is it about living with diabetes that you find most difficult and how does that make you feel? ‘
‘What are your greatest concerns about your diabetes? ‘
‘How is your diabetes getting in the way of other things in your life right now? ’
Enquiring if there has been a change in mood during the past 2 weeks or since the last visit, when exploring barriers (new or
different) to treatment and self -management such as feeling overwhelmed or stressed by diabetes or other life stressors. See
table below (Hendrieckx et al , 2016, ICGP 2016, ADA 2019).

4. Be aware of potential risk of diabetes distress or more severe diabetes burnout vs. a current diagnosis or treatment for
depression or potential risk of same.

5. Build emotional strength and reliance through working in a b ehavioural way and using person centred skills, taking every
opportunity to build self -efficacy and use positive affirmations. Highlight any positive outcomes being achieved through any self care effort – for example, attendance at appointments/SMES is a positive. A person’s perception about their ability or self efficacy to self-manage is related to improved diabetes self -management and treatment outcomes (ADA 2019).

6. If stresses or diabetes distress are identified, discuss coping skills and stress management skills . Educating clients on the skill of
problem solving to support self-care and addressing prior successes supports development of their coping skills.

7. Discuss the potential effects of stress on blood glucose and self -care tasks. (Polonsky, 1999)
 Stress can have a direct and immediate effect on blood glucose but only for certain people at certain times. There seems to
be people who are stress insens itive, stress sensitive where blood glucose levels rise under stress and those whose blood
glucose levels drop. Not a ll stressful situations cause blood glucose problems, most likely when one feels trapped or out of
personal control.
 In summary, stress has the potential to interfere with diabetes self-care, which can elevate blood glucose and to influence
blood glucose directly. The more distressed you are the more likely blood glucose is likely to be affected.

8. Discuss stress management strategies used by clients or explore options. Have supporting literatu re available on stress
management and diabetes distress.

9. If concerns identified, ask permission to discuss with GP.

10. Recognise when to refer and be aware of local services/support available to support coping skills, stress management and
diabetes distress.

11. In 2019, this area will be investigated further regarding short psychosocial questionnaires that may be suitable for use by the
dietitian with people with diabetes e.g. PAID-20

Stressors/barriers to self -care which may increase risk of diabetes distress or diabetes burnout may include:

- New diagnosis of diabetes and associated fears of the condition and risk of complications, overwhelmed with treatment advice
- Prospect or Presence of complications – associated fear, worry, anxiety, overwhelmed by all the appointments/tests
- Presence of other co-existing illness e.g. CVD, Cancers, Respiratory illness, Sight issues
- Attitudes and feelings – fear, denial, anxiety
- Changes in medical status – diabetes or other medical conditions, need to intensify treatment
- Personal issues – depression, poor coping style, eating disorders, lack of knowledge, inaccurate health beliefs, negative feelings
about diabetes, fear and frustration about weight, unrealistic or unclear expectations about self -care
- Other Family, social, financial, other life stressors/issues e.g. living conditions, finances, support (too much/too little), alcoh ol or
drug abuse, relationship issues, family confused about self -care responsibilities, chronic life stress at home/work, poor relationship
with GP/HCPs, competing priorities, unstructured life (e.g. shiftwork, unemployed, retired), stigma, discrimination, unhelpfu l
reactions
- Recent life events
- Anxiety about diabetes care i.e. using insulin or injections, hypos management and risk, polypharmacy
- Burden of daily self-care tasks

PSYCHOSOCIAL SUPPORTS: Consider the need to direct /support people with local services or literature – know referral pathways.

 Be aware of local HSE and community counselling and stress management services – link with services locally. On the 17/4/19,
the HSE circulated information (by email) to All Users on the New National Directory of Mental Health Services (see belo w).
Discuss within your team and with local diabetes care teams in acute and community services your recommendations for local
support/service access e.g.

 HSE mental health departments (e.g. appointment access, WRAP training),
 HSE psychology department support the psychological well-being of people through individual and group based
interventions (e.g. appointment access, courses on stress control, mindfulness),
 HSE National Counselling Service in Primary Care (CIPC) for medical card clients. Dietitians have referral permission in
many areas – contact your local service to discuss and access leaflets for clients and referrers and referral
forms https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/mental-health-services/counsellingpc/ More details below.
 local low cost counselling services, local HSE OT service re stress management/relaxation co urses, National Learning
Network Courses (NLN) personal recovery programmes (e.g. WRAP, wellness for mental health, FOCUS/Pathways)
http://www.nln.ie/Our-Training-Courses.aspx
 HSE Self Management Education and Support Directory – see Appendix on Diabetes Self-Management Education & Support.

 HSE support on mental health is available at https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/. A campaign #LittleThings offers posters,
support and information to inform and create awareness of taking care of mental health. Posters and postcards are available t o
order via www.healthpromotion.ie under order publica tions/mental health. Dietitian experience has included use of these,
spreading the postcards on the table and inviting clients to select one that they like or has meaning for them – suitable for use in
1-1 and group work. For more info: https://www2.hse.ie/services/campaigns/littlethings/about -littlethings.html

 Some HSE areas offer mental health supports in the form of reference texts and literature via their local library:
www.hse.ie/yourgoodself

 Consider including a speaker in the local diabetes support course on emotional health and well-being and coping skills for looking
after diabetes. Some courses have had input from HSE psychologists or the mental health nurse as an extra 30min session either
on the core programme or at annual review addressing topics such as stress control, mindfulness, healthy coping, managing
mental health/depression.

 Mentalhealthireland.ie – offers a range of leaflets and bookmarks which are available to order - 01-2841166.
https://www.mentalhealthireland.ie/

 Diabetes Ireland also has a section on counselling services for diabetes with a list of accredited counsellors – discuss within teams
re use.

BUILDING & MAINTAINI NG SUPPORT: Support is offered through

 REFERRAL to the local diabetes support courses to develop knowledge, skills, confidence and self -management skills which also
offers peer support and social support,
 INCLUSION of family members, carers or friends in appointments /courses as deemed appropriate by the person with diabetes,
 SIGN-POSTING the person to the relevant supports for any aspect of care that they are addressing e.g. PA supports, classes, etc;
 INFORMING them of the Diabetes Ireland organization, contacts, membership details, info days and web site details.

KEY FURTHER READING: See References list and Evidence review in the care plan folder
 Hendrieckx C 2016 – Clinician Guidelines developed by Australian Team from Mental Health & Diabetes National Development
Programme – adapted for NHS, UK in 2019. ‘Diabetes and Emotional Health’.
 Young-Hyman 2016 (ADA) – ADA guidelines on psychosocial care
 ADA 2019 – further guidance on psychosocial care and reference to ADA 2016
 Polonsky WH – Diabetes Burnout 1999 Textbook – recommended reading

FURTHER DETAILS OF S UPPORTS:
Diabetes Ireland (www.diabetes.ie):
2 Diabetes Ireland Care Centres are purpose built units in Santry, Dublin and Mary Street, Cork City and include a t eam of
practitioners include Podiatrists ( feet), Counsellors ( mind), Dietitians ( food) and Audiologists ( hearing). They provide a seamless,
integrated service that is affordable and can be booked easily with no long waiting lists.

Contact: the helpline on 01-8428118 (Mon-Fri, 9am – 5pm) or email info@diabetes.ie for support or information.
Cork : Enterprise House, 36 Mary St, Cork City, T12 YR74 Telephone: (021-4274229
Dublin : 19 Northwood House, Northwood Business Campus, Santry, Dublin 9, D09 DH30 Telephone: (01-8428118)

HSE CIPC counselling - https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/mental-health-services/counsellingpc/
This service is for people with mild to moderate psychological difficulties. It is a short -term counselling service that provides up to 8
counselling sessions with a professionally qualified and accredited Counsellor/Therapist.
It is a service for medical card holders , who are 18 years of age or over, and who want help with psychological problems that are
appropriate for time limited counselling in primary care.
The service is suitable for people who are experiencing certain difficulties such as: depression, anxiety, panic reactions, relationship
problems,loss issues, stress
More information on this can be found on the HSE website below which provides the following information:
- Information for clients, Information for referrers, Referral form

Aware – your supporting light through depression - https://www.aware.ie/education/life-skills-online-programme/
Life Skills Programme – Aware have an online called Life skills. This programme is based on the principles of cognitive behavioural
therapy (CBT). The Life Skills programmes are designed to help participants learn more about how we think and how this can
influence our actions in helpful or unhelpful ways.
The Life Skills Online Programme is comprised of eight modules which you can work through online in your own time from the
comfort of your own home. The participants benefit from the support of an Aware trained volunteer supporter for the first eight
weeks, who you can choose to share progress with. It is recommended one module per week for eight consecutive weeks is
completed. Your supporter wil l check in online to see how the participant is getting on with each week's module. After this eight
week period, the participant has access to the modules to review and reflect upon for up to 12 months.
These programmes run at various times of the year – check the Aware website for the Life Skills Programme schedule.

HSE 2019 National Directory of Mental Health Services - https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/mental-health-services/ The HSE
circulated information to all HSE Staff on 17/4/19 on the new National Directory for Mental Health Services. The latest copy of the
directory is available on the hse intranet as it is updated regularly
http://hsenet.hse.ie/HSE_Central/MentalHealthDivision/National_Directory_of_Mental_Health_Services/

‘Mental Health Services is pleased to inform all staff the availability of the updated version of the National Directory of Mental
Health Services (v.19Q2) which can be downloaded from the HSE intranet. The Directory provides a single national view of all of
the HSE mental health services that are available throughout Ireland, alongside those services delivered through a section 38 or
section 39 service level agreements.

How it benefits me? It provides an up-to-date and valuable tool to inform planning and resource allocation as well as containing
data that is useful for report writing and responding to queries. For all staff the directory offers a single source of infor mation
when searching for the location, contact details and opening hours of a particular service.
What sort of information can I access? Users will find the following data included in the National Directory that will be periodically
updated by the HSE Mental Health Services in collaboration with the CHOs:
- Number and type of services in operation in a particular area.
- Number of beds in each Approved Centre, with a more in-depth breakdown for those run by the HSE.
- Service names, Addresses, phone numbers and emails (where possible).
- Opening hours.
How is the information organised? The information can be organised by region (county, Community Healthcare Organisation), the
population served (CAMHS, adults, older people etc.) and service type (Day Hospital, Community Residence etc.). Users can
search/filter for information by means of the Directory’s user friendly interface or through the master dataset.
How often will it be updated? The Directory will be updated quarterly. You wil l be informed whenever the latest version of the
Directory is available.
More information on data protection and the development of this resource can be found on the intranet and within the Director y.
On behalf of Mental Health Services we hope that you w ill find using the National Directory of Mental Health Services beneficial to
your work and that you will contribute to its ongoing development.’

21. SLEEP

The assessment of sleep pattern and duration should be considered; recent research found that poor sleep quality, short sleep , and
long sleep were associated with higher A1c in people with Type 2 diabetes. As part of comprehensive management of people with
Type 2 Diabetes, it is recommended that sleep behaviours are considered at initial, follow up and annual visits. Age adjusted rates of
sleep obstructive sleep apnoea are a risk factor in cardiovascular disease and are significantly higher with obesity, especially central
obesity. The prevalence of Obstructive sleep apnoea in populations with Type 2 Diabetes may be as high as 23% and the prevale nce
of any sleep-disordered breathing may be as high as 58%. (ADA 2019)

22. SMOKING – TRAINING FOR HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS
Training Further details
Basic Training to support service users to
quit smoking
Making Every Contact Count training which is now available online at
www.makingeverycontactcount.ie. Following the completion of the online training you
will be automatically invited to an optional add on face to face workshop. This is the
only Brief Intervention / Motivational Interviewing training offered by Health
Promotion at the moment.
Smoking Cessation and Mental Health
Briefing Document
This is a tailored resource produced for Mental Health Services in recognition of the
unique challenges arising from established practices and misconceptions around
mental health and smoking. It is a valuable reference for staff in these services to
support and guide them in their day to day interactions with clients and service users.
This resource challenges myths and emphasises the crucial role staff play in reducing
tobacco prevalence.
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/tobaccocontrol/smoking-cessation-and-mentalhealth-briefing-document.pdf

National Intensive Tobacco Cessation
online training
Stop Smoking Practitioner Training and Certification The HSE intensive smoking
cessation training and assessment programme was developed by the National Centre
for Smoking Cessation Training UK (NCSCT) and is based on research into what
competencies (skills and knowledge) are required by smoking cessation specialists. The
training programme includes the information required to pass the practitioner
assessment and receive full HSE/NCSCT certification as a tobacco cessation specialist
practitioner. P ractitioners accessing this intensive smoking cessation training
programme are recommended to firstly complete the level 1 Making Every Contact
Count online training. Further information on this
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/tobaccocontrol/intensive-smoking-cessationtraining/
Mental Health Speciality Module

The NCSCT also have an online Mental Health Specialty Module. Access to this course is
only open to those who have completed NCSCT Certified Practitioner Assessment.
Further information please see
http://www.ncsct.co.uk/publication_MH_specialty_module.php

23. SMOKING & SMOKING SERVICES
Smoking & Type 2 Diabetes
If on assessment, the person is a smoker, explore interest in targeting smoking as a change.
 If available the person should be sent to a structured program to quit smoking or offer suggestions to facilitate stopping
smoking. Inform of local supports available. There are local smoking cessation officers in local primary care services. There is a
choice between one to one service and group service. See below for more information on services.
 Inform of the support available from the National Quitline 1850201203 (https://www2.hse.ie/quit-smoking/) which can
double your chance of quitting for good . See services table below for other means of contacting QUIT.
 Offer health promotion literature as appropriate or required (review www.healthpromotion.ie for available literature).
 Advise all people not to use cigarettes and other tobacco products or e -cigarettes. (ADA 2019)
 The most common recommendations by smoking cessation practitioners are two types of NRT, a patch to deal with most
common withdrawal symptoms and a short acting NRT for urges to s moke e.g. gum/lozinger/inhaler. Champix is still available
and effective but has some side effects e.g. nausea . Champix is available on the medical card.
 Electronic substitutes can be used to replace cigarettes but not as an alternative to start smoking. (IDF 2017) or to facilit ate
smoking cessation. Research on short and long term safety and health effects of e -cigarettes is ongoing (ADA 2019).
 The HSE official line is not to promote use of e -cigarettes. (Bradshaw, 2019)
QUIT smoking cessation servi ces can be accessed through a variety of means as summarised in the table below.
Resource for health care professionals is available to support discussion on smoking cessation – 30 second advice for healthcare
professionals to stop smoking – order from www.healthpromotion.ie (See under support folder under “Smoking”)
Training for Health Care Professionals available on smoking cessation: see Training section.

HSE Smoking Cessation Support Services - Treatment and support
HSE Smoking Cessation Services provide specialist support to help you quit in community or health service settings.
One-to-one support
Health care profession als can refer a person with diabetes directly to their local smoking cessation officer. Contact services locally
for referral form. This form of intensive support combined with drug treatments has the highest success rates. This service is usually
free of charge and is run by health services. Smoking cessation advisors are specially trained to support you through the quitting
process. You can attend smoking cessation clinics for one -to-one sessions that are tailored to meet your needs. They usually take
place for 1-4 weeks before your quit date and continue for up to one year after you quit.
These sessions will:
1. look at your desire and readiness to quit,
2. take a history of your smoking habit,
3. assess your nicotine addiction,
4. identify your reasons for quitting and any difficulties or risks of relapse,
5. create a personal plan for your quitting,
6. measure your carbon monoxide levels,
7. recommend suitable medical treatment, refer you to doctor for prescription and follow -up.
Group support
Group courses are usually six weeks long and meet once a week for about an hour. They are usually run by smoking cessation
advisors and can be very effective. In the first session the members of the group introduce themselves, they review past atte mpts to
quit, determine reasons for quitting and set a quit date for the group. At follow -up meetings, members discuss their progress,
address any difficulties, swap coping tips, and encourage one another to stay quit. The advisors will measure each member’s c arbon
monoxide levels (before and after quitting), their leve l of nicotine addiction, and recommend medical treatment. Contact the HSE
QUIT Team on Freephone 1800 201 203 to talk to an advisor or to find you nearest HSE QUIT Service.
For more information on smoking cessation services log onto https://www2.hse.ie/quit-smoking/ or www.quit.ie

Other supports
People can also sign up to the Quit Programme and you decide how you want your plan to work and can get:
 daily support via email and text message
 a personalised web page to track your progress
 one-to-one support from a trained advisor
 tips from people who’ve successfully stopped smoking
People can contact the Quit team as follows or sign up to the Quit Plan and ask them to call you back. See inf ormation below:
Telephone - FREEPHONE 1800 201 203. Mon. 10-8pm, Tues.–Thurs. 10am – 7pm, Fri.- 10am – 5pm Sat- 10am – 1pm
Text Free text QUIT to 50100
Facebook You can find on facebook – You can Quit
Email support@quit.ie
Twitter Tweet @ HSEQuitTeam
Live Chat https://www2.hse.ie/quit-smoking/-follow this link and you will see symbol for live chat
Website link https://www2.hse.ie/quit-smoking/
Support services per
county
Click into the Find Support Services box on the right hand side of the page. A list of local smoking
cessation services and contact details for officers in your area is
provided.https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/quit-smoking/get-help-when-you-quit-smoking/

24. TRAINING & SUPPORT

TRAINING to support Community Dietitians delivering Dietetic Care to People with Type 2 Diabetes

Further training
1. Skills training on Person centred care and inter personal skills for Dietitians such as Behaviour Change Training (BCT)
Behaviour Change Skills for Healthcare professionals Level 1: Patient centred skills – ran by INDI.
2. Skills training on Motivational Interviewing and Behavioural a pproach to care for Dietitians such as Behaviour Change
Training (BCT) Behaviour Change Skills for Healthcare professionals Level 2: Motivational interviewing – ran by INDI.
3. DSME Educator training
4. Group Facilitation Skills Training – ran by local health promotion teams, INDI or via SPE office.
5. Essential Reading and CPD on Empowerment and Behaviour Change - The Art of Empowerment Book by Bob Anderson and
CD with a workbook for completion of reflection (see support folder on Psychosocial care & support).
6. Dietetic care and Chronic Kidney Disease Training for Dietitians – ran by INDI and Renal Interest Group. Renal Interest
Group Introduction to CKD stage 1 to 3a, online course launched Jan 2020 and essential for all Dietitians providing diabetes
care. https://learning.indi.ie Website for patients: www.irishkidneydiet.ie
7. Diabetes in Primary Care Module distance learning course ran by UCC, Cork and NUIG, Galway.
8. Knuston Ireland – http://www.diabetescounselling.co.uk/. Ran in Ireland with support of HSE National Clinical Programme
for Diabetes, presenting the empowerment approach to care based on Bob Anderson work.
9. Courses on supporting psychosocial care for staff and clients e.g. 6 week Stress Control Courses ran by HSE Psychology
Teams, Minding your well-being courses by local health promotion and improvement office, saf eTALK training
10. Physical activity training – HSELand module.
11. Making Every Contact Count Training (MECC) by HSE - https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/making-everycontact-count/, https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/making-every-contact-count/training-programme/
12. Mental health service learning hub - https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/mental-health-services/
13. Open Dialogue (dialogue skills) to inform and support Recovery oriented clinical practice – available from local HSE Mental
Health Service.
14. Training to support clinicians with suicide prevention e.g.
- SafeTalk training - https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/mental-health-services/nosp/training/
- esuicide training – free training – 1-2 hours exploration in suicide awareness http://www.yourmentalhealth.ie/getinvolved/community-action/esuicidetalk/
15. INDI DIG offer training including Level 1 course on the Dietetic Management of Type 1 Diabetes, for dietitians not
specialised in diabetes, but who see clients with type 1 as part of caseload.

Supporting texts/reading/sources of info for health care professionals
 Join the National Institute for Preventive Cardiology (NIPC) for access to newsletters, training courses, etc www.nipc.ie
 Diabetes Ireland in general as a source of info – membership supports and www.diabetes.ie
 Diabetes Ireland - SMART Course for clients – www.diabeteseducation.ie
 Diabetes UK online course for health care professionals ‘Diabetes in Healthcare’.
https://www.diabetes.org.uk/professionals/training--competencies/diabetes-in-healthcare
 Primary Care Diabetes Society (PCDS) – access to CPD learning and diabetes info
 Diabetes topic mailing list/Newsletters
o Medicine Matters diabetes (newsletter@news.medicinematters.com; www.diabetes.medicinematters.com )
o E-newsletter – www.glycosmedia.com
o https://www.diabetesonthenet.com/
 Patient experiences – https://thriveabetes.ie

CPD Opportunities
 Diabetes Ireland - Annual Diabetes Ireland Conference – Spring; Health Awareness Days linked to World Diabetes Day.
 Annual Primary Care Diabetes Society (PCDS) Conference for health care professionals (UK lead) – Spring
 Diabetes Self-Management Alliance (DSMA) Annual educational meeting
 Local Diabetes Interest Group Conferences and meetings for diabetes team members e.g. CHO 4, CHO 3, CHO 2, ECAD .
 Member of the Diabetes Interest Group of the INDI
 Cambridge Diabetes Education Programme - http://cdep.org.uk/

25. TRAVEL GUIDANCE & HOLIDAYS

If a person is on insulin, the following checklist applies when travelling abroad;
 A letter on medical stationary stating you have diabetes and use insulin pens or pumps.
 A written prescription using generic medicine names and a copy of it in another bag or with a friend in case of theft/loss.
 Spare pens/insulin, extra glucose strips, ketone tests if travelling for a long break.
 To always get the required vaccines if travelling further afield.
 Insulin Travel Wallets are the most convenient way to carry insulin – It is important that your insulin supplies are kept at the
correct temperature. Diabetes Ireland stock Large Insulin travel wallet €25 or Extra Large €30. For more details/to order a ccess
website https://www.diabetes.ie/product-category/insulin-travel-wallet/ or contact Elayne on 01 8428118. Travel Wallets can
be sent out in regular post by An Post.
 Carry quick acting carbohydrate in the case of a hypo and advise your travel companion on what to do . Refer to Hypoglycaemia
Appendix
 Alcohol may lower blood glucose so don’t drink alcohol on an empty stomach and if you drink alcohol, eat some carbohydrate
before going to bed.
 You should carry vital medicine and equipment in your hand luggage and Airport Police are aware of this, therefore you can ask
for their assistance if you encounter difficulty at security.
 Drink plenty of water in a hot climate and paying the extra cost for air conditioning may be beneficial to help prevent night time
glucose fluctuations.
 Insulin may be absorbed faster in warm climates, this may cause blood glucose levels to drop which may lead you to require less
insulin.
 Blood glucose is me asured in mmol/L in Ireland but in mg/dl in many other countries for example in the Unites States. So if you
need to contact a healthcare professional abroad, the conversion rate is 1mmol/L= 18mg/dl. e.g. 6 mmol/L= 108mg/dl .

Travel Insurance:
Ordinary holiday insurance or backpackers insurance booked through your travel agent may not cover your diabetes. Read the small
print. Diabetes is categorised as a ‘pre-existing condition’. If you fall ill while abroad as a result of diabetes or the diabetes is deeme d
to be aggravating the illness, an ordinary travel insurance policy will not cover it. ERM Brokers will quote you for Travel I nsurance
covering Diabetes and we recommend getting a quote. Tel Grainne at ERM on 01 845 4361 (Diabetes Ireland 2019).

EHIC (European Health Information Card) information: www.ehic.ie

The card is covered under EU regulat ions only. So you can benefit f rom holding one only in EU/EEA countries. Hard Brexit obviously
will affect it. But if there is agreement reached between UK and the EU - this might be covered in the agreement.
If your pre-existing condition causes a medical emergency while travelling, the card will cover you.
It is used in circumstances when you become ill or have an accident when travelling to another EU country for a short visit.
More information can be obtain from Citizen’s Information website under The European Health Information Card section;
https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel_and_recreation/travel_abroad/european_health_insurance_card.html

RESOURCES
A document is avai lable to support dietitians/educators and other health care professionals with key information on free diabetes
resources for use with people with type 2 diabetes. It supports this section by providing links to relevant website and literature –
see Support folder/Resources. This has been updated in 2020.

The health promotion website ( www.healthpromotion.ie) is a great resource where health care professionals can log in and register
as a health care professional and order resources to be used in clinic /groups. There is a wide range of resources available on
various websites presented there.

REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION & PHILOSOPHY OF CARE
Anderson, R. (1987) Diabetes educators as philosophers. The Diabetes Educator 13 (3) p259-261
Anderson, R.M., Funnell, M.M., (2002) Using the empowerment approach to help patients change behaviour in Anderson, BJ.,
Rubin, R.R. 2nd ed Practical Psychology for Diabetes Clinicians USA: ADA. P3-12.
Diabetes UK, Department of Health, (2015) Structured patient education in diabetes report from the patient education working
group. UK: Department of health
Funnell, M.M., Anderson, R.M., Arnold, M.S., Barr, B.S., Donnelly, M, Johnson, P.D., Taylor -Moon, D., White, N.H., (1991)
Empowerment: an idea whose time has come in diabetes education The Diabetes Educator 17(1) p 37 –41.
Forde, R., Dinneen, S., Humphreys, M., Carmody, M., Clarke, A., O Leary, K., Conway, J. (2009) Health Service Executive (HSE) .
Review of Diabetes Structured Education.
Harkins, V. (2016) A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service
Executive, Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive.
HSE (2020) GP contract https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/gmscontracts/2019agreement/agreement -2019.pdf).
https://www.icgp.ie/index.cfm?spPath=about/news/137284E6-5ADC-4EE8-92D885470B9CEC39.html
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Clinical Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/model -of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf
International Diabetes Federation (2019) IDF Diabetes Atlas, 9th edn. . Brussels: IDF. Available at: https://www.diabetesatlas.org
O Neill, K.N., McHugh, S.M.,Tracey, M.L., Fitzgerald, A.P., Kearney, P.M. (2018) Health service utilization and related costs
attributable to diabetes. Diabetes Medicine 35(12):1727-1734. doi:10.1111/dme.13806
1 Dietary recommendations for adults with Type 2 Diabetes
Diet -NEW, Dietary pattern - NEW, Energy
American Diabetes Association (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( Suppl 1): S81 -S89
Evert, A. B., Dennison, M., Gardner C.D., Garvey, W.T., Lau K.H.K, MacLeod, J., Mitri, J., Pereira, R.P., Rawlings, K., Robin son, S.,
Saslow, L., Uelman, S., Urbanski, P.B., and Yancy Jr., W.S. Nutrition Therapy for adults with diabetes or prediabetes: A consensus
report Diabetes Care 2019; 42: 731-754
Nutrition Support Interest Group of the INDI (2015). Nutrition Support Reference Guide. Dublin: INDI.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N. , McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines

Carbohydrate
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Working group of the BDA Diabetes Specialist Group. (2018). Low carbohydrate diets for the management of Type 2 Diabetes in
adults. [online] Available at: https://www.bda.uk.com/resource/low-carbohydrate-diets-for-the-management-of-type-2-diabetes-inadults.html [Accessed 19 Feb. 2020].
Diabetes UK (2017). Position statement Low-carb diets for people with diabetes. [ebook] London: Diabetes UK. Available at:
https://www.diabetes.org.uk/resources-s3/2017-09/low-carb-diets-position-statement-May-2017.pdf [Accessed 19 Feb. 2020].
GI - NEW
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Sucrose
American Diabetes Association( 2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( Suppl 1): S81 -S89
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor , D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Fructose - NEW
American Diabetes Association (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( S uppl 1): S81-S89
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Fruit –NEW
Food Safety Authority of Ireland (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Yoghurt –NEW
Diabetes Ireland. 2020. Trying To Find A Healthy Yoghurt...... [online] Available at: <https://www.diabetes.ie/are-you-at-risk-freediabetes-test/get-sugar-smart/yoghurts/> [Accessed 27 July 2020].
Diabetes UK. 2020. Yogurts. [online] Available at: <https://www.diabetes.org.uk/guide-to-diabetes/enjoy-food/eating-withdiabetes/diabetes-food-myths/yogurts> [Accessed 27 July 2020].
Fizzy drinks –NEW
American Diabetes Association (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( Suppl 1): S81 -S89

Harkins, V., 2016. A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service Executive,
Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive .
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
International Diabetes Federation.( 2017) Clinical Practice Recommendations For Managing Type 2 Diabetes In Primary Care.
Online) Brussels : International Diabetes Federation .
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN), “Carbohydrates and Health,” TSO, London, 2015.

Sweeteners
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management o f diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
British Dietetic Association. (2016) Policy Statement The Use of Artificial Sweeteners. [online] Available at:
https://www.bda.uk.com/improvinghealth/healthprofessionals/policy_statements/sweetners [Accessed 30 Aug. 2019].
Keogh, A. and Devine, H. (2016) Position Statement of the INDI on Sweeteners. INDI Diabetes Interest Group.
American Diabetes Association. (2018) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care. Volume 41 (Supplement 1).
American Diabetes Association (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( Suppl 1): S51
FSAI Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 (OJ L354, p16, 31/12/2008) of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008
on food additives
Diabetic foods
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Harkins, V., 2016. A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service
Executive, Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive.
National Institute for Clinical Excellence, 2015. Type 2 diabetes in adults: management. NICE guidelines [NG28] Published
December.pg 14
Fibre
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (2015) Carbohydrates and Health , London: TSO.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines

Piepoli, M.F., Hoes, A.W., Agewall, S., Albus, C., Brotons, C., Catapano, A.L., Cooney, M.T., Corra, U., Cosyns, B., Deaton, C. and
Graham, I., 2016. 2016 European Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice: The Sixth Joint Task Fo rce of
the European Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical Practice (constituted by
representatives of 10 societies and by invited experts) Developed with the special contribution of the European Association f or
Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation (EACPR). European heart journal, 37(29), pp.2315-2381.
Food Safety Authority of Ireland (2016) Information on Nutrition and Health Claims, Dublin : Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Protein
American Diabetes Association (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( Suppl 1): S81 -S89
Davies, M.J., D’Alessio, D.A., Fradkin, J., Kernan, W.N., Mathieu, C., Mingrone, G., Rossing, P., Tsapas, A., Wexler, D.J. an d Buse, J.B.
(2018) Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA)
and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetologia, 61(12), pp.2461-2498.
Department of Health (2016) Healthy Food for Life Food Pyramid Questions and Answers, Dublin: Department of Health.
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Red and Processed meat - NEW
British Dietetic Association. (2015) The BDA’s stance on the IARC evaluation on red and processed meat, Available
at: https://www.bda.uk.com/news/view?id=85 (Accessed: 20th June 2019).
Bouvard, V., Loomis, D., Guyton, K.Z., Grosse, Y., El Ghissassi, F., Benbrahim-Tallaa, L., Guha, N., Mattock, H. and Straif, K., 2015.
Carcinogenicity of consumption of red and processed meat. The Lancet Oncology, 16(16), pp.1599-1600.
Scarborough, P., Allender, S., Clarke, D., Wickramasinghe, K. and Rayner, M., 2012. Modelling the health impact of environmentally
sustainable dietary scenarios in the UK. European journal of clinical nutrition, 66(6), p.710.
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (2010) Iron and Health, London: TSO.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Fat
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
American Diabetes Association (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( Suppl 1): S81 -S89
Davies, M.J., D’Alessio, D.A., Fradkin, J., Kernan, W.N., Mathieu, C., Mingrone, G., Rossing, P., Tsapas, A., Wexler, D.J. an d Buse, J.B.

(2018) Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA)
and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetologia, 61(12), pp.2461-2498.
Evert, A.B., Dennison, M., Gardner, C.D., Garvey, W.T. Lau, K.H., MacLeod, J., Mitri, J., Pere ira, R.F., Rawlings, K., Robinson, S.,
Saslow, L., Elmen, S., Urbanski, P.B. and Yancy Jr, W.S. (2019) Nutrition Therapy for Adults With Diabetes or Prediabetes: A
Consensus Report. Diabetes Care, 42: 42:731–754
British Dietetic Association and Diabetes UK. (2015) Policy statement: Dietary fat consumption in the management of Type 2
Diabetes. Available at: https://www.diabetes.org.uk/professionals/position-statements-reports/food-nutrition-lifestyle/dietary-fatconsumption-in-the-management-of-type-2-diabetes (Accessed 20th May 2019)
Piepoli, M.F., Hoes, A.W., Agewall, S., Albus, C., Brotons, C., Catapano, A.L., Cooney, M.T., Corra, U., Cosyns, B., Deaton, C. and
Graham, I. (2016) 2016 European Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice: The Sixth Joint Task Force of
the European Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical Practice (constituted by
representatives of 10 societies and by invited experts) Developed with the special contribution of the European Association for
Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation (EACPR). European heart journal, 37(29), pp.2315-2381.
The Sixth Joint Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical
Practice (constituted by representatives of 10 societies and by invited experts) (2016). 2016 European Guidelines on cardiova scular
disease prevention in clinical practice. European Heart Journal; 37, 2315–2381
The Task Force for diabetes, pre-diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD), (2020) ESC Guidelines on diabetes, pre -diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases
developed in collaboration with the EASD. European Heart Journal; 41(2):255-323
Cosentino, F., Grant, P.J., Aboyans, V., Bailey, C.J., Ceriello, A., Delgado, V., Federici, M., Filippatos, G., Grobbee, D.E. , Hansen, T.B.
and Huikuri, H.V. (2019) 2019 ESC guidelines on diabetes, pre-diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases developed in collaboration with
the EASD: the task force for diabetes, pre-diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases of the European Society of cardiology (ESC) and the
European association for the study of diabetes (EASD). European heart journal, 41(2), pp.255-323.
Saturated Fat
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Piepoli, M.F., Hoes, A.W., Agewall, S., Albus, C., Brotons, C., Catapano, A.L., Cooney, M.T., Corra, U., Cosyns, B., Deaton, C. and
Graham, I. (2016) 2016 European Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice: The Sixth Joint Task Force of
the European Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical Practice (constituted by
representatives of 10 societies and by invited experts) Developed with the sp ecial contribution of the European Association for
Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation (EACPR). European heart journal, 37(29), pp.2315-2381.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines

Evert, A.B., Dennison, M., Gardner, C.D., Garvey, W.T. Lau, K.H., MacLeod, J., Mitri, J., Pereira, R.F., Rawlings, K., Rob inson, S.,
Saslow, L., Elmen, S., Urbanski, P.B. and Yancy Jr, W.S. (2019) Nutrition Thera py for Adults With Diabetes or Prediabetes: A
Consensus Report. Diabetes Care, 42: 42:731–754
British Dietetic Association and Diabetes UK. (2015) Policy statement: Dietary fat consumption in the management of Type 2
Diabetes. Available at: https://www.diabetes.org.uk/professionals/position-statements-reports/food-nutrition-lifestyle/dietary-fatconsumption-in-the-management-of-type-2-diabetes [Accessed 20th May 2019]
The Sixth Joint Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical
Practice (constituted by representatives of 10 societies and by invited experts). (2016) 2016 European Guidelines on cardiovascular
disease prevention in clinical practice. European Heart Journal; 37, 2315–2381
The Task Force for diabetes, pre-diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). (2020) ESC Guidelines on diabetes, pre -diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases
developed in collaboration with the EASD. European Heart Journal; 41(2):255-323
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. (2019) Saturated fats and health, London: TSO.
The Task Force for the management of dyslipidaemias of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and European Atherosclerosis
Society (EAS). (2019) 2019 ESC/EAS Guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias: lipid modification to reduce cardiovascular
risk. European Heart Journal; 00, 1-78
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide suppo rting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Department of Health. (2016) Healthy Food for Life Revised healthy eating guidelines and Food Pyramid rationale , Dublin:
Department of Health.
MUFA
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsl and, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Evert, A.B., Dennison, M., Gardner, C.D., Garvey, W.T. Lau, K.H., MacLeod, J., Mitri, J., Pereira, R.F., Rawlings, K., Rob inson, S.,
Saslow, L., Elmen, S., Urbanski, P.B. and Yancy Jr, W.S. (2019) Nutrition Thera py for Adults With Diabetes or Prediabetes: A
Consensus Report. Diabetes Care, 42: 42:731–754
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Department of Health. (2016) Healthy Food for Life Revised healthy eating guidelines and Food Pyramid rationale , Dublin :
Department of Health.
Department of Health. (2016) Healthy Food for Life Food Pyramid leaflet, Dublin: Department of Health.

Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. (2019) Saturated fats and health, London: TSO.
PUFA
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Evert, A.B., Dennison, M., Gardner, C.D., Garvey, W.T. Lau, K.H., MacLeod, J., Mitr i, J., Pereira, R.F., Rawlings, K., Robinson, S.,
Saslow, L., Elmen, S., Urbanski, P.B. and Yancy Jr, W.S. (2019) Nutrition Therapy for Adults With Diabetes or Prediabetes: A
Consensus Report. Diabetes Care, 42: 42:731–754
The Task Force for the management of dyslipidaemias of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and European Atherosclerosis
Society (EAS). (2019) 2019 ESC/EAS Guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias: lipid modification to reduce cardiovascul ar
risk. European Heart Journal; 00, 1-78
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Department of Health. (2016) Healthy Food for Life Revised healthy eating guidelines and Food Pyramid rationale, Dublin:
Department of Health.
Department of Health. (2016) Healthy Food for Life Food Pyramid leaflet, Dublin: Department of Health.
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. (2019) Saturated fats and health, London: TSO.
TFA
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
The Sixth Joint Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical
Practice (constituted by representatives of 10 societies and by invited experts). (2016) 2016 European Guidelines on cardiovascular
disease prevention in clinical practice. European Heart Journal; 37, 2315–2381
The Task Force for diabetes, pre-diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). (2020) ESC Guidelines on diabetes, pre -diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases
developed in collaboration with the EASD. European Heart Journal; 41(2):255-323
The Task Force for the management of dyslipidaemias of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and European Atherosclerosis
Society (EAS). (2019) 2019 ESC/EAS Guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias: lipid modification to reduce cardiovascul ar
risk. European Heart Journal; 00, 1-78

Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Department of Health. (2016) Healthy Food for Life Revised healthy eating guidelines and Food Pyramid rationale, Dublin:
Department of Health.
Plant Sterols and Stanols
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Catapano, A.L., Graham, I., De Backer, G., Wiklund, O., Chapman, M.J., Drexel, H., Hoes, A.W., Jennings, C.S., Landmesser, U. ,
Pedersen, T.R. and Reiner, Ž. (2016) 2016 ESC/EAS guidelines for the management of dysli pidaemias. European heart journal, 37(39),
pp.2999-3058.
Main, L., (2015) Food Fact Sheet Stanols and Sterols. [online]. (4th Edition). Birmingham, BDA. Available
https://www.bda.uk.com/foodfacts/PlantStanolsAndSterols.pdf [27/08/2019].
Fish & Oily Fish
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Healthy Ireland. (2016) Healthy food for life. Available at: https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/our -priorityprogrammes/heal/heal-docs/food-pyramid-leaflet.pdf (Accessed 20th May 2019)
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). (2018) Dioxins and related PCBs: tolerable intake level updated. Available at:
https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/press/news/181120 (accessed 14/5/19)
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Health Service Executive (HSE). (2018) My Pregnancy Expert advice for every step. Available at: https://www2.hse.ie/filelibrary/child-health/my-pregnancy-book.pdf (Accessed 20th May 2019)
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. (2004) SACN Advice on Fish Consumption, London: TSO.
Pan, A., Chen, M., Chowdhury, R., Wu, J.H., Sun, Q., Campos, H., M ozaffarian, D. and Hu, F.B. (2012) α-Linolenic acid and risk of
cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The American journal of clinical nutrition, 96(6), pp.1262-1273.
Burdge G.C. and Wootton S.A. (2002) Conversion of a-linolenic acid to eicosapentaenoic, docosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic
acids in young women. British Journal of Nutrition, 88(4), pp.411-420
Burdge, G.C., Jones, A.E. and Wootton, S.A. (2002) Eicosapentaenoic and docosapentaenoic acids are the principal products o f αlinolenic acid metabolism in young men. British Journal of Nutrition, 88(4), pp.355-363.
Vannice, G. and Rasmussen, H. (2014) Position of the academy of nutrition and dietetics: dietary fatty acids for healthy
adults. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 114(1), pp.136-153.

Fish Oil Supplements
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (2017). 116 Management of diabetes A national clinical guideline. Edinburgh: SIGN.
Available at https://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/sign116.pdf (accessed 25th February 2020).
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). (2014) Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid
modification. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg181/resources/cardiovascular -disease-risk-assessment-andreduction-including-lipid-modification-pdf-35109807660997 (Accessed 20th May 2019)
Evert, A.B., Dennison, M., Gardner, C.D., Garvey, W.T. Lau, K.H., MacLeod, J., Mitri, J., Pereira, R.F., Rawlings, K., Robinson, S. ,
Saslow, L., Elmen, S., Urbanski, P.B. and Yancy Jr, W.S. (2019) Nutrition Therapy for Adults with Diabetes or Prediabetes: A
Consensus Report. Diabetes Care, 42: 42:731–754
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin: Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
The Task Force for diabetes, pre-diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). (2020) ESC Guidelines on diabetes, pre -diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases
developed in collaboration with the EASD. European Heart Journal; 41(2):255-323
The Task Force for the management of dyslipidaemias of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and European Atherosclerosis
Society (EAS). (2019) 2019 ESC/EAS Guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias: lipid modification to reduce cardiovascul ar
risk. European Heart Journal; 00, 1-78
Micronutrients
Nutrition Therapy for Adults with Diabetes or Prediabetes: A Consensus Report. Diabetes Care, Volume 42, May 2019; pp 744.
Harkins, V., 2016. A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service Exec utive,
Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive .
International Diabetes Federation. (2017) Clinical Practice Recommendations For Managing Type 2 Diabetes In Primary Care.
Online) Brussels: International Diabetes Federation . Available at www.idf.org/managing-type2-diabetesSodium
Mancia, G., Fagard, R., Narkiewicz, K., Redán, J., Zanchetti, A., Böhm, M., Christiaens, T., Cifkova, R., De Backer, G., Domi niczak, A.
and Galderisi, M. (2013) 2013 Practice guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of
Hypertension (ESH) and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC): ESH/ESC Task Force for the Management of Arterial
Hypertension. Journal of hypertension, 31(10), pp.1925-1938.
Salt/Sodium
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019)

Diabetes UK March 2018. Evidence-based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. pp 35.
2 Alcohol
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Health Service Executive. (2019) Alcohol and Health available at www.askaboutalcohol/health/ (accessed 4th October 2019).
Health Service Executive. (2019) Weekly Low Risk Drinking Guidelines available at https://www.askaboutalcohol.ie/yourdrinking/weekly-low-risk-drinking-guidelines/ (accessed 4th October 2019).
Health Service Executive. (2019) Alcohol and it’s effects on the body available at https://www.askaboutalcohol.ie/health/effects-onthe-body/ accessed 4th October 2019)
Drink Aware (2020) www.drinkaware.ie (accessed 26/2/2020)
3 Behaviour Change
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Facing Life with Diabetes (Chapter 2) in Hendrieckx, C., Halliday, J.A., Beeney, L.J., Speight, J. (2016) Diabetes and Emotional Health:
a practical guide for healthcare professionals supporting adults with Type 1 an d Type 2 Diabetes, ed. Canberra: National Diabetes
Services Scheme, 19-30.
Anderson, RM., Funnell, MM., Burkhart N., et al. (2008) 101 Tips for Behaviour Change in Diabetes Education, USA: ADA.
Anderson, RM., Funnell, MM. (2005) The Art of Empowerment Stories and Strategies for Diabetes Educators, USA: ADA.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), p14-16.
Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Hendrieckx, C., Halliday, J.A., Beeney, L.J., Speight, J. (2019) Diabetes and Emotional Health: a practical guide for healthcare
professionals supporting adults with Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes , 2nd ed., London: Diabetes UK.
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Clinical Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/model -of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf
Mitchie, S., West, R., Campbell, R., Brown, J., Gainforth, H., (2014) ABC of Behaviour Change Theories An essential resource for
researchers and policy makers and practitioners 83 theories. UK: Silverback Publishing.
Najvitis, LM, Weiss, S. (1994) Variations in therapist effectiveness in the treatment of patients with substance use disorder s: an
empirical review. Addiction, 89,p 679-688.

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), (2007) Behaviour change general approaches
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph6 [Accessed 23 rd May 2019]
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), (2014) Behaviour change: individual approaches
https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/PH49 [Accessed 23 rd May 2019]
Miller, WR., Rollick, S. (2013) Motivational interviewing helping people change 3 rd edition, New York: Guildford.
Pearson, D. (2014) ‘1.3 Changing health behaviour’ in BDA Manual of Dietetic Practice 5th ed., UK: Wiley Blackwell, p25 -38.
Stewart, M., Belle Brown, J., Weston, W.W., McWhinney, I.R., McWilliam, C.L., Freeman, T.R., (2006) Patient centred medicine
transforming the clinical method 2nd edition. UK: Radcliffe-Oxford.
4 Blood Glucose Monitoring –NEW
The Medicines Management programme report on Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose (SMBG) in Type 2 Diabetes 2016 is available on
www.hse.ie/yourmedicines [Accessed 23 rd May 2019]
Guide to Blood Glucose Testing (leaflet for people with type 2 diabetes) - order from www.healthpromotion.ie under the Healthy
Eating Category and it can be viewed at https://www.healthpromotion.ie/hp-files/docs/HDP00976.pdf [Accessed 23 rd May 2019]
‘Type 2 Diabetes Test Strips Reimbursement, Questions and Answers for Health Professionals’ and ‘Type 2 Diabetes Test Strips:
Questions and Answers for Patients’
http://www.hse.ie/eng/about/Who/clinical/natclinprog/diabetesprogramme/Bloodsugartesting/ . [Accessed 23 rd May 2019]
Guidance on the quantity of blood glucose test strips available to people with Type Two Diabetes in Ir eland based on treatments
prescribed, available at - https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/primarycare/east-coast-diabetes-service/diabetesnursing/capillary-blood-glucose-monitoring/ [Accessed 23 rd May 2019]
Letter re: Reimbursement of Blood Glucose Test Strips (BGTS) for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, Prof Michael Barry
National Clinical Lead, Medicines Management Programme https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/clinical-strategy-andprogrammes/bgts-for-patients-with-type-2-diabetes-mellitus.pdf
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Cli nical Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes /moc/model-of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf [Accessed 23 rd
May 2019]
Harkins, V. (2016) A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Dublin: Irish College of General Practitioners.
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, P.S62.
The HSE Blood Glucose Monitoring Review Group documents from 2017 – accessed from local Clinical Nurse specialist in Diabetes
on the review group, Siobhan Meehan [Accessed 20 th May 2019]
The Health Technology Assessment Group prepared an Advice Note 2017/001 on the Freestyle Libre System https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/htag/publications/htag -advice-note-freestyle-libre.pdf [Accessed 23rd May
2019]

Letter re: Reimbursement of Abbott FreeStyle Libre Sensor effective 1st April 2018
https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/pcrs/circulars/pharmacy/10-2018-pharmacy-circular.pdf From Anne Marie Hoey, Primary Care
Reimbursement & Eligibility to Irish Pharmacies. [Accessed 23 rd May 2019]
Guide to Blood Glucose Monitoring - https://www.healthpromotion.ie/hp-files/docs/HDP00976.pdf
Diabetes and Driving - Driving Guidelines from NDLS – https://www.ndls.ie/images/Documents/Forms/Diabetes-and-Driving.pdf
5 Chronic Kidney Disease
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Harkins, V. (2016) A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Dublin: Irish College of General Practitioners.
INDI Renal Interest Group Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. (2012) KDIGO 2012 Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney international, Suppl. 3, 2013; 3(1): 1-150.
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Clinical Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/model -of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf [Accessed 23 rd
May 2019]
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2014) Chronic kidney disease in adults: assessment and management. Clinical
guideline [CG182].
6 Clinical Targets - for ADULTS and for OLDER ADULTS
American Diabetes Association (2019) ‘Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes’, Diabetes Care, 42, S1,S54-S55
Davies, M.J., D’Alessio, D.A., Fradkin, J., Kernan, W.N., Mathieu, C., Mingrone, G., Rossing, P., Tsapas, A., Wexler, D.J. an d Buse, J.B.
(2018) Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA)
and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetologia, 61(12)
CROI (2018) Cholesterol Masterclass/Update on Cardiovascular Disease https://nipc.ie/library/nipc-presentations/
Harkins, V.(2016) ‘A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care’, Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service
Executive, Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive .
HSE (2015) Diabetes Cycle of Care – see careplan folder on Clinical Targets
HSE (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes – A Guide for Health Care Professionals (Clinical Management
Guidelines).
X-PERT Ireland. (2018) My Diabetes Health Results Form working group

7 Complications of Diabetes - NEW
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Clinical Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/model -of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf [Accessed 27 th
June 2019]
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2012) Dr Diarmuid Smith, Dr Velma Harkins, Mairead Gleeson (2016). A
Practical Guide to Integrated Type 2 diabetes Care produced by the Irish College of General Practitioners (ICGP)
(i) Foot Care
Jeffcoate, W.J, Harding, K.G. (2003) Diabetic foot ulcers. Lancet 361; 1545 -1551
Abbott, C.A., Carrington, A.L., Ashe, H., Bath, S., Every, L.C., Griffiths, J., Hann, A.W., Hussein, A., Jackson, N., Johnson , K.E. and
Ryder, C.H. (2002) The North‐West Diabetes Foot Care Study: incidence of, and risk factors for, new diabetic foot ulceration in a
community‐based patient cohort. Diabetic medicine, 19(5), pp.377-384.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (2017). 116 Management of diabetes A national clinical guideline. Edinburgh: SIGN.
Available at https://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/sign116.pdf (accessed 25th February 2020).
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2011) Model o f Care for the Diabetic Foot. [Online] Ireland Health
Service Executive Available https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/clinical-strategy-and programmes/model-of-care-for-thediabetic-foot-.pdf [Accessed 27 th June 2019]
(ii) Oral Health
Thayumanavan, B., Jeyanthikumari, T. and Abu Dakir, V.N. (2015) ‘Diabetes & Oral Health’, International Journal of Medical and
dental science. 4(2) 901-905 Available [http://www.informaticsjournals.com/index.php/ijmds/article/viewFile/19653/16304]
Accessed 27th June 2019
Dental Health Foundation Ireland (2018)
https://www.dentalhealth.ie/assets/files/pdf/diabetes_adult_postcard_final.pdf
(iii) Non Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
Norris, S. (2018) What everyone with diabetes should know about liver disease.
EASL-EASD-EASO Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of non -alcoholic fatty liver disease. (2016) Journal of Hepatology
vol 64, 1388-1402.
Crosbie, O. (2018) Non Alcohol Fatty Liver Disease.
(iv) Cardiovascular Disease
MacGregor AS, Price JF, Hau CM, Lee AJ, Carson MN, Fowkes FG: Role of systolic blood pressure and plasma triglycerides in dia betic
peripheral arterial disease: the Edinburgh Artery Study. Diabetes Care 22:453–458, 1999

8 Diabetes Self-Management Education and Support – NEW
Powers, A.M., Bordsley, J., Cupress, M., Duker, P., Funnell, M.M, Fischi, Amy Hess., Maryniuk, M.D., Siminerio, L., Vivian, E . (2015)
Diabetes Self Management Education and Support in Type 2 Diabetes: A Joint Pos ition Statement of the American Diabetes
Association, the American Association of Diabetes Educators and the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, Diabetes Care.
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Cli nical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1
Deakin, T.A., Cade, J.E., Williams, R,. Greenwood, D.C. (2006) Structured patient education: the diabetes X -PERT programme makes a
difference. Diabet Med, 23;944-954.
Loveman, E., Frampton, G.K., Clegg, A.J. (2008) The clinical effectiveness of diabetes education models for Type 2 Diabetes: a
systematic review. Health Tech Assess, 12 (9): 1-116, iii.
Piatt, G.A., Anderson, R.M., Brooks, M.M., Songer, T., Siminerio, L.M., Kory tkowski, M.M., Zgibor, J.C. (2010) Three year follow up of
clinical and behavioural improvements following a multifaceted diabetes care intervention: results of a randomized controlled trial.
Diabetes Educ, 36 (2)2: 301-9.
Davies, M.J., Heller, S., Skinner, T.C., Campbell, M.J., Carey, M.E., Craddock, S., Dallosso, H.M., Daly, H., Doherty, Y., Eaton, S., FOX,
C., Oliver, L., Rantell, K., Rayman, G., Khunti, K. (2008) Diabetes Education and self management for ongoing and newly diag nosed
collaborative. Effectiveness of the diabetes education for ongoing and newly diagnosed (DESMOND) programme for people with
newly diagnosed Type 2 Diabetes: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ, 336 (7642): 491-5.
Chrvala, C.A., Sherr, D., Lipamn, R.D. (2016) Diabetes self management education for adults with type 2 Diabetes mellitus. A
systematic review of the effect on glycaemic control. Patient Educ Couns, 99 (6): 926-43.
Steinsbekk, A., Rygg, L.O., Lisulo, M., Rise, M.B,, Fretheim, A. (2012) Group based diabetes sel f management compared to routine
treatment for people with type 2 diabetes mellitus. A systematic review with meta analysis. BMC Health Serv ReS, 12:213
Guo, XH., Ji, L.N., Lu, J.M., Liu, J., Lou, Q.Q., Liu, J., Shen, L., Zhang, M.X, Lv, X.F., Gu, M.J. ( 2014) Efficacy of structured education in
patients with Type 2 Diabetes mellitus receiving insulin treatment. J Diabetes, 6 (4): 290-7.
Ford, R., Dinneen, S., Humphreys, M., Carmody, M., Clarke, A., O Leary, K., Conway, J. (2009) Health Service Executive (HSE). Review
of Diabetes Structured Education.
https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/topics/diabetes/reviewdiabetesstructureded2009.pdf
Health Information and Quality Authority. (2015) Health Technology assessment of chronic disease self management support
interventions. https://www.hiqa.ie/sites/default/files/2017-01/CDSM-Diabetes.pdf
Chatterjee, S., Davies, M.J., Heller, S., Speight, J., Snoek, F.J., Khunti, K. (2018) Diabetes Structured Self Management edu cation
programmes: a narrative review and current innovations. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinal, 6: 130-42.
Chronic Conditions Working Group. (2017) Living well with a chronic condition: Framework for self management support. Nationa l
framework and Implementation plan for self management support for chronic conditions: COPD, Asthma, Diabetes and
Cardiovascular Disease.
Driving Guidance – see Hypoglycaemia Appendix – NEW

9 Entitlements – NEW
Long Term Illness scheme. Available https://www2.hse.ie/costs-schemes-allowances/
Diabetic retina screening programme. Available http://www.diabeticretinascreen.ie
Foot care services. Available
https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health_services/care_in_your_community/chiropody_services.html
Tax credits relief. Available. https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/healthexpenses/additional-diet-expenses-for-coeliacs-and-diabetics.aspx
Supplementary payment scheme. Available.
https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/social_welfare_payments/supplementary_welfare_schemes/supplementary
_welfare_allow.html
Citizens Information. Available. www.revenue.ie; www.welfare.ie;http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/
Food labelling – NEW – see support folder
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2016) Information on Nutrition and Health Claims, Dublin : Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Food Safety Authority of Ireland. (2019) Healthy eating, food safety and food legislation A guide supporting the Healthy Ireland Food
Pyramid, Dublin : Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
Department of Health. (2016) Guide to creating a front of pack (FoP) nutrition label for pre-packed products sold through retail
outlets, London: UK Department of Health.
Irish Heart. (2014) Food shopping card, Available at: https://irishheart.ie/wpcontent/uploads/2017/01/foodshoppingcard2014.pdf (Accessed: 20th June 2019).
NHS. (2017) Reference intakes explained, Available at: https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/eat-well/what-are-reference-intakes-on-foodlabels/ (Accessed: 20th June 2019).
European Parliament. (2007) REGULATION (EC) No 1924/2006 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 20
December 2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods, European Union: Official Journal of the European Union.
10 Hypertension and Hyperlipidaemia
(i) Hyperlipidaemia
Catapano, A.L., Graham, I., De Backer, G., Wiklund, O., Chapman, M.J., Drexel, H., Hoes, A.W., Jennings, C.S., Landmesser, U. ,
Pedersen, T.R. and Reiner, Ž. (2016) 2016 ESC/EAS guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias. European heart journal, 37(39),
pp.2999-3058.
Harkins, V. (2016) A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service
Executive, Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive .
Sacks, F.M., Lichtenstein, A.H., Wu, J.H., Appel, L.J., Creager, M.A., Kris-Etherton, P.M., Miller, M., Rimm, E.B., Rudel, L.L., Robinson,
J.G. and Stone, N.J. (2017) Dietary fats and cardiovascular disease: a presidential advisory from the American Heart Associat ion.
Circulation, 136(3), pp.e1-e23.

Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (2017). 116 Management of diabetes A national clinical guideline. Edinburgh: SIGN.
Available at https://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/sign116.pdf (accessed 25th February 2020).
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management o f diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019; 42(Suppl 1): S81 -S89
(ii) Hypertension
Mancia, G., Fagard, R., Narkiewicz, K., Redon, J., Zanchetti, A., Böhm, M., Christiaens, T., Cifkova, R., De Backer, G., Domi niczak, A.
and Galderisi, M. (2013) 2013 ESH/ESC guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the Task Force for the Management
of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Blood
pressure, 22(4), pp.193-278.
Harkins, V. (2016) A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service
Executive, Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive .
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (2017). 116 Management of diabetes A national clinical guideline. Edinburgh: SIGN.
Available at https://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/sign116.pdf (accessed 25th February 2020).
International Diabetes Federation. (2017) Recommendations For Managing Type 2
Diabetes In Primary Care. (Online) Brussels. International Diabetes Federation. Available at www.idf.org/managing-type2diabetesSodium [Accessed 01/06/2019]
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (201 8)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Car 2019 ; 42 (Suppl 1): S81 -S89
11 Hypoglycaemia, including Driving Guidance
(i) Hypoglycaemia
Care, D., 2019. Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes 2019. Diabetes Care, 42, p.S61-S70.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Harkins, V. (2016) A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Dublin: Irish College of General Practitioners.
Diabetes Ireland. (2019) Treatment Options for Hypoglycaemia. [online]. Available https://www.diabetes.ie/treatment-options-forhypoglycaemia/ [Accessed 27th June 2019].
Diabetes Ireland. (2019) Talk Hypos. [online]. Available https://www.diabetes.ie/living-with-diabetes/living-type-1/talkhypos/
[Accessed 27th June 2019].

(ii) Driving
National Driver License Service. (2017) Diabetes and Driving. [online]. Road Safety Authority. Available
http://www.rsa.ie/Documents/Licensed%20Drivers/Diabetes%20and%20Driving%202016.pdf [Accessed 27th June 2019].
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2012) Dr Diarmuid Smith, Dr Velma Harkins, Mairead Gleeson (2016). A
Practical Guide to Integrated Type 2 diabetes Care produced by the Irish College of General Practitioners (ICGP)
Diabetes Ireland. (2020). Driving and Type 2 Diabetes - Diabetes Ireland. [online] Available at: https://www.diabetes.ie/living-withdiabetes/living-with-type-2/driving-type-2-diabetes/ [Accessed 19 Feb. 2020].
Diabetes.ie. (2020). Raising funds with emergency card. [online] Available at: https://www.diabetes.ie/wpcontent/uploads/2019/04/raising-funds-with-emergency-card.pdf [Accessed 19 Feb. 2020].
Road Safety Authority. (2019) Sláinte agus Tiomáint. Medical Fitness to Drive Guidelines (Group 1 and 2 Drivers). [online]. R oad
Safety Authority. Available
https://www.rsa.ie/Documents/Licensed%20Drivers/Medical_Issues/Medical%20Fitness%20Guidelines.pdf [Accessed 28th Feb.
2020].
12 Illness/sick day guidance – NEW
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Clinical Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/model -of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf [Accessed 22 nd
August 2019]
Harkins, V. (2016) A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care. Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Servi ce
Executive, Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive.
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( Suppl 1): S81 -S89
Down, S. (2018). How to advise on sick day rules. Diabetes & Primary Care, 20(1), pp.15-16.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Diabetes Ireland Living well with Type 2 Diabetes 2016 (available online) https://www.diabetes.ie/downloads/patient-booklets/
(accessed 22/8/19)
13 Language – NEW
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care 42(S1)pp S34-45.
Cooper, A., Kanumilli, N., Hill, J., Holt, R.I.G., Howarth, D., Lloyd, C.E., Kar, P., Nagi, D., Naik, S. Nash, J., Nelson, H., Owen, K.,
Seindell, B., Walker, R., Whicher, C., Wilmot, E. (2018) Language matters. Addressing the use of language in the care of people with
diabetes: position statement of the English Advisory Group. Diabetes Medicine, 35 (12), pp1630-1634
https://doi.org/10.1111/dme.13705

Diabetes Australia (2011). A new language for diabetes. Improving communications with and about people with diabetes (in
support folder)
Dickinson, J.K., Guzman, S.J., Marynuik, M.D., O’Brian, C.A., Kadohiro, J.K., Jackson, R.A., D’Hondt, N., Montgomery, B., Clo se, K.L.,
Funnell, M.A. (2017) The use of language in diabetes care and education Diabetes Care 40(12) pp1790-1799.
https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/40/12/1790
Dickinson, J.K. (2018) The experience of diabetes related language in diabetes care. Diabetes Spectrum 31 (1)pp58 64https://doi.org/10.2337/ds16-0082 (in support folder)
International Diabetes Federation (2014) Language Philosophy: Technical Document. Available from http://jaimedulceguerrero.com/wp-content/uploads/ 2015/03/IDF-LANGPHI-2.pdf.
NHS UK (2018) Language Matters Language and Diabetes UK (in support folder)
Speight, J., Conn, J., Dunning, T., Skinner, T.C., Diabetes Australia (2012). Diabetes Australia A new language for diabetes: improving
communications with and about people with diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 97(3), pp425-31
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22513346
14 Medicines - NEW
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. (2019) The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Davies, M.J., D’Alessio, D.A., Fradkin, J., Kernan, W.N., Mathieu, C., Mingrone, G., Rossing, P., Tsapas, A., Wexler, D.J. an d Buse, J.B.
(2018) Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA)
and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetologia, 61(12)
15 Minority Ethnic Groups - NEW
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
International Diabetes Federation. (2017) Clinical Practice Recommendations For Managing Type 2 Diabetes In Primary Care.
(Online) Brussels : International Diabetes Federation.
American Diabetes Association. (2018) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care. Volume 41 (Supplement 1).
16 Obesity/Overweight/Weight Management including Diabetes Remission (NEW)
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes 2019. Diabetes Care, 42, p.S61-S70.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
Harkins, V. (2016) A practical guide to int egrated type 2 diabetes care. Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service
Executive, Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive.
Taylor, R. (2013) Type 2 diabetes: etiology and reversibility. Diabetes care, 36(4), pp.1047-1055.
Steven, S. and Taylor, R. (2015) Restoring normoglycaemia by use of a very low calorie diet in long ‐and short‐duration Type 2
diabetes. Diabetic Medicine, 32(9), pp.1149-1155.

Steven, S., Hollingsworth, K.G., Al-Mrabeh, A., Avery, L., Aribisala, B., Caslake, M. and Taylor, R. (2016) Very low-calorie diet and 6
months of weight stability in type 2 diabetes: pathophysiological changes in responders and nonresponders. Diabetes care, 39(5),
pp.808-815.
Leslie, W.S., Ford, I., Sattar, N., Hollingsworth, K.G., Adamson, A., Sniehotta, F.F., McCombie, L., Brosnahan, N., Ross, H., Mathers,
J.C. and Peters, C. (2016) The Diabetes Remission Clinical Trial (DiRECT): protocol for a cluster randomised trial. BMC family
practice, 17(1), p.20.
Lean, M.E., Leslie, W.S., Barnes, A.C., Brosnahan, N., Thom, G., McCombie, L., Peters, C., Zhyzhneuskaya, S., Al -Mrabeh, A.,
Hollingsworth, K.G. and Rodrigues, A.M. (2018) Primary care-led weight management for remission of type 2 diabetes (DiRECT): an
open-label, cluster-randomised trial. The Lancet, 391(10120), pp.541-551.
Lean, M.E., Leslie, W.S., Barnes, A.C., Brosnahan, N., Thom, G., McCombie, L., Peters, C., Zhyzhneuskaya, S., Al -Mrabeh, A.,
Hollingsworth, K.G. and Rodrigues, A.M. (2019) Durability of a primary care -led weight-management intervention for remission of
type 2 diabetes: 2-year results of the DiRECT open-label, cluster-randomised trial. The lancet Diabetes & endocrinology, 7(5),
pp.344-355.
Taylor, R. and Holman, R.R. (2015) Normal weight individuals who develop type 2 diabetes: the personal fat threshold. Clinical
Science, 128(7), pp.405-410.
Arun, C.S., Pandit, R. and Taylor, R. (2004) Long-term progression of retinopathy after initiation of insulin therapy in Type 2 diabetes:
an observational study. Diabetologia, 47(8), pp.1380-1384.
International Diabetes Federation. (2017) Clinical Practice Recommendations For Managing Type 2 Diabetes In Primary Care
(Online) Brussels: International Diabetes Federation.
Volkert, D., Beck, A.M., Cederholm, T., Cruz-Jentoft, A., Goisser, S., Hooper, L., Kiesswetter, E., Maggio, M., Raynaud -Simon, A.,
Sieber, C.C. and Sobotka, L. (2019) ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition and hydration in geriatrics. Clinical Nutrition, 38(1), 10-47
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, 2010. Management Of Obesity Quick Reference Guide. Edinburgh: Scottish
Intercollegiate Guidelines Network.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), 2012. Type 2 Diabetes: Prevention In People At High Risk. NICE.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), 2013. BMI: Preventing ill-health and premature death in Black, Asian and
other minority ethnic groups. NICE.
17 Older Adults and Diabetes – NEW
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes 2019. Diabetes Care, 42, p.S139-147
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Me llor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
International Diabetes Federation. (2013) Managing Older People with Type 2 Diabetes Global Guideline . [online] Brussels:
International Diabetes Federation. Available at: https://www.idf.org/e-library/guidelines/78-global-guideline-for-managing-olderpeople-with-type-2-diabetes.html (Accessed 26 Jun. 2019)

Volkert, D., Beck, A.M., Cederholm, T., Cruz-Jentoft, A., Goisser, S., Hooper, L., Kiesswetter, E., Maggio, M., Raynaud -Simon, A.,
Sieber, C.C. and Sobotka, L. (2019) ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition and hydration in geriatrics. Clinical Nutrition, 38(1), pp.24-26
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Clinical Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/model -of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf (Accessed 26 th
June 2019)
World Health Organisation (2002) World Health Organisation. [ONLINE] Available at:
https://www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/ageingdefnolder/en/. [Accessed 2 August 2019].
18 Physical Activity
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. The journal of Clinical and Applied Research and
Education. Diabetes Care. Volume 42, Supplement 1.
Dyson, P.A., Twenefour, D., Breen, C., Duncan, A., Elvin, E., Goff, L., Hill, A., Kalsi, P., Marsland, N., McArdle, P. and Mellor, D. (2018)
Diabetes UK evidence‐based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes. Diabetic medicine, 35(5), pp.541547. Full guideline: www.diabetes.org.uk/nutrition-guidelines
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Clini cal Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/m oc/model-of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf [Accessed 23 rd
May 2019]
Healthy Ireland. (2016) National Physical Activity Plan for Ireland. Get Ireland Active. [Online] Available
https://www.getirelandactive.ie/Professionals/National-PA-Plan.pdf [Accessed 1st August 2019]
19 Pre-pregnancy planning & Pregnancy for women of child-bearing age – NEW
Irish Maternity Dietitians Group. (2018) Pregnancy Planning and Diabetes leaflet 2018.
The National Maternity Hospital (2019). Pregnancy Planning and Diabetes. Dublin: HSE. Available at
https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/publications/topics/diabetes/pregnancy -planning-and-diabetes-leaflet.pdf(accessed 25th February
2020).
National Clinical Programme for Diabetes Working Group. (2018) Model of Integrated Care for Type 2 Diabetes. A Guide for Health
Care Professionals (Clinical Management Guidelines). [Online] Ireland Health Service Executive. Available
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/ncps/diabetes/moc/model -of-integrated-care-type-2-diabetes-2018.pdf (Accessed 26 th
June 2019)
Health Service Executive (HSE). (2010) Guidelines for the Management of Pre-gestational and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus from
Pre-conception to the Postnatal period. Dublin: HSE. Available at https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/primarycare/east-coastdiabetes-service/management-of-type-2-diabetes/diabetes-and-pregnancy/guidelines-for-the-management-of-pre-gestational-andgestational-diabetes-mellitus-from-pre-conception-to-the-postnatal-period.pdf (accessed 25th February 2020).
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). (2015) Diabetes in Pregnancy: Management from pre conception to the
postnatal period. NICE guideline [GN3] available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng3 (accessed 25th February 2020).
20 Psychosocial Care and Support – including stress – NEW

American Diabetes Association (2019) ‘Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes’, Diabetes Care, 42, S1,S54-S55
Hendrieckx, C., Halliday, J.A., Beeney, L.J., Speight, J. (2016) Diabetes and Emotional Health: a practical guide for healthcare
professionals supporting adults with Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes , ed. Canberra: National Diabetes Services Scheme. See Chapters 1,
2, 3.
Hendrieckx, C., Halliday, J.A., Beeney, L.J., Speight, J. (2019) Diabetes and Emotional Health: a practical guide for healthcare
professionals supporting adults with Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes , 2nd ed., London: Diabetes UK.
Harkins, V., (2016) ‘A practical guide to integrated type 2 diabetes care’, Irish College of General Practitioners, Health Service
Executive, Irish Endocrine Society, editors. Dublin: Health Service Executive .
Polonsky, W.H. (1999) ‘How Stress Influences Diabetes and what to do about it’ in Polonsky, W.H. ed. Diabetes Burnout What to do
when you can’t take it anymore, Canada: American Diabetes Association, 269-285
Polonsky, W.H. (1999) Diabetes Burnout What to do when you can’t take it anymore , Canada: American Diabetes Association
Young-Hyman, D., de Groot, M., Hill -Briggs, F. et al. (2016) ‘Psychosocial care for people with diabetes: a position statement of the
ADA’, Diabetes Care, 39, 2126-2140
21 Sleep – NEW
American Diabetes Association. (2018) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care. Volume 41 (Supplement 1).
22 Smoking – Training for Health care professionals – NEW
American Diabetes Association. (2019) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019 ; 42( Suppl 1): S53 -54
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (March 2018). Stop Smoking interventions and services. Available at
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng92 (accessed 25th February 2020).
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (2017). 116 Management of diabetes A national clinical guideline. Edinburgh: SIGN.
Available at https://www.sign.ac.uk/assets/sign116.pdf (accessed 25th February 2020).
International Diabetes Federation. (2017) Clinical Practice Recommendations For Managing Type 2 Diabetes In Primary Care.
(Online) Brussels: International Diabetes Federation.
23 Smoking and Smoking Services
Health Service Executive (HSE). (2020) Quit Smoking Available at https://www2.hse.ie/quit-smoking/ (accessed 25th February 2020).
24 Training and Support for Dietitians – NEW see website links
25 Travel Guidance & Holidays – NEW
Diabetes Ireland. (2019) Travelling With Type 2 Diabetes. (Online). Available https://www.diabetes.ie/living-with-diabetes/livingwith-type-2/managing-diabetes/travelling-type-2-diabetes/ (Accessed March 2019)
Citizen Information. (2019) The European Health Insurance Card. (Online). Available
https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel_and_recreation/travel_abroad/european_health_insurance_card.html (Accessed
March 2019)