ICMR GUIDELINES FOR
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES
Indian Council of Medical Research, Ansari Nagar,
New Delhi – 110 029

ICMR GUIDELINES FOR MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES 2018
S.NO CONTENTS PAGE NO.
FOREWORD i
PREFACE ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT iii
PREAMBLE iv
SECTION 1 : INTRODUCTION
1.1 Definition 1
1.2 Epidemiology 1
1.3 Types of diabetes 1
1.4 Differentiating between type 1 and type 2 diabetes 2
1.5 Goals for management 4
1.6 Diabetes education 4
1.7 Prevention of diabetes 5
SECTION 2 : SCREENING FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES
2.1 Whom and when to screen? 7
2.2 How to screen? 7
2.3 Where to screen? 8
2.4 Retesting 8
2.5 Other aspects 8
SECTION 3 : DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
3.1 Diagnostic criteria for diabetes 9
3.2 Symptoms of diabetes 9
3.3 Criteria for the diagnosis of prediabetes 9
3.4 Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) 10
3.5 Testing for type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents 11
SECTION 4 : TARGETS FOR CONTROL OF DIABETES
4.1 Targets for metabolic control in diabetes 12
4.2 Glycemic targets during pregnancy 13
SECTION 5 : MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP OF PEOPLE
WITH DIABETES
5.1 How to monitor and follow up people with diabetes? 14
5.2 Self monitoring with blood glucose (SMBG) with glucose
monitor 14
5.3 What to do during Annual check up 15
SECTION 6 : NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT OF
DIABETES
6.1 Lifestyle goals in diabetes 16
6.2 Medical Nutrition Therapy (MNT) 16
6.3 Physical activity and exercise 21
6.4 Yoga and diabetes 22
SECTION 7 : PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT OF
DIABETES
7.1 Anti-hyperglycemic drugs 24
7.2 Insulin therapy 39
7.3 Non-insulin injectable therapy (GLP-1 receptor agonists) 47
SECTION 8 : COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
8.1 Acute complications 48
8.2 Chronic complications 49
8.3 Coronary artery disease 51
8.4 Diabetic nephropathy 52
8.5 Diabetic retinopathy 54
8.6 Diabetic neuropathy 56
8.7 Diabetic foot 57
SECTION 9 : DIABETES AND PREGNANCY
9.1 Pre-gestational diabetes 63
9.2 Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) 63
9.3 Management of hyperglycemia in pregnancy 65
9.4 Post-partum follow up 66
SECTION 10 : COMORBID CONDITIONS
10.1 Hypertension 67
10.2 Dyslipidemia 68
10.3 Obesity 68
10.4 Tuberculosis 68
SUMMARY OF GUIDELINES 69
i

ii

iii
Dr. Tanvir Kaur
Scientist ‘F’
Non Communicable Disease
Indian Council of Medical Research
iv
PREAMBLE
D iabetes has become a global problem and the epidemic is most pronounced in South East Asia particularly
India where an estimated 72 million people are believed to have diabetes and another 80 million have pre-diabetes.
More than 90 – 95% of all patients with diabetes have type 2 diabetes. The treatment of type 2 diabetes has undergone
rapid changes in the last decade, and several new drugs have been introduced in the market.
In 2005, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) brought out the ‘Guidelines for Management of
Type 2 Diabetes’ as a small book and this has found wide application all over India. As more than a decade has
elapsed since the publication of that document, ICMR felt that a revision of the Guidelines for Management of Type
2 Diabetes was indicated. An expert group was constituted by ICMR, to look at the old guidelines and to suggest
modifications as may be needed, based on the latest developments in the management of type 2 diabetes.
After several rounds of iteration, a document was prepared which was then circulated to a few additional
experts. After getting the comments from these experts, an ICMR Workshop entitled ‘ICMR GUIDELINES FOR
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES 2018’ was held at Chennai on 10th January 2018 and a group of experts was
invited by ICMR. The Workshop was divided into different sections. Each part of the document was studied in detail
and necessary changes were made to the document. The document was then placed in the ICMR website, giving an
opportunity for anyone else who wished to view the documents and give their comments or suggestions to do so. A
few additional suggestions were received which were also incorporated in the final document.
We now have great pleasure in publishing the ‘ICMR Guidelines for Management of Type 2 Diabetes 2018’.
We trust that this booklet will be useful not only for practicing physicians and general practitioners but also for medical
students (both undergraduates and postgraduates) and also for nurses, educators and other paramedical personnel.
We welcome feedback and suggestions from readers so that when the next set of guidelines is prepared by ICMR,
these suggestions can be incorporated.
We also wish to thank ICMR for their guidance and support and all the experts for the time and effort they
spent in making this document. A special word of thanks to Dr. Ranjit Unnikrishnan who painstakingly compiled all the
suggestions and comments and helped finalize the document.
Dr. Nikhil Tandon,
Professor & Head,
Department of Endocrinology,
All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Ansari Nagar,
New Delhi
Dr. V. Mohan,
Director,
Madras Diabetes Research Foundation &
Dr. Mohan’s Diabetes Specialties Centre,
4, Conran Smith Road, Gopalapuram
Chennai
SECTION 1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Definition
Diabetes mellitus is a syndrome of multiple etiologies characterized by chronic
hyperglycaemia with disturbances of carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism
resulting from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action or both. This disorder is often
associated with long term complications, involving organs like eyes, kidneys, nerves,
heart and blood vessels.
1.2 Epidemiology
In recent decades, India has witnessed a rapidly exploding epidemic of diabetes.
Indeed, India today has the second largest number of people with diabetes in the
world. The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) estimates that there are 72.9 million
people with diabetes in India in 2017, which is projected to rise to 134.3 million by the
year 2045. The prevalence of diabetes in urban India, especially in large metropolitan
cities has increased from 2% in the 1970s to over 20% at present and the rural areas
are also fast catching up.
1.3 Types of diabetes
According to the American Diabetes Association and the World Health Organisation,
diabetes can be classified into four main types (see Box).
Classification of Diabetes
z Type 1 diabetes
z Type 2 diabetes
z Gestational diabetes
z Other types of diabetes (Monogenic diabetes, pancreatic diabetes,
drug-induced diabetes etc.)
Of these, the two most important forms of diabetes are type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
Type 1 diabetes is primarily due to autoimmune-mediated destruction of pancreatic
beta cells, resulting in absolute insulin deficiency and thus requiring insulin for good
health and survival. While type 1 diabetes is also on the increase, the actual numbers
of people with type 1 diabetes in India is, relatively speaking, still small. Type 2
diabetes, on the other hand, accounts for over 90-95% of all people with diabetes and
is characterized by insulin resistance and abnormal insulin secretion, either of which
may predominate. The diabetes epidemic relates particularly to type 2 diabetes,
and predominantly due to the changing lifestyles, urbanization, d emography and
increased longevity.
1.4 Differentiating Between Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes
Table 1.1 below provides a few clinical points to differentiate between type 1 and type
2 diabetes.
Table 1.1 Points to differentiate between type 1 and type 2 diabetes
Type 1 diabetes Type 2 diabetes
Age at diagnosis Usually childhood and
adolescence, but can occur
in adults as well
Usually postpubertal;
most common in middle to
later age groups
Diabetes in 1st degree
relative
Unusual Common
Severe osmotic
symptoms/ Ketosis at
diagnosis
Can occur Rare
Markers of insulin
resistance
Absent Present
C-peptide assay Absence of beta-cell reserve Preserved beta-cell
reserve
Pancreatic
autoantibodies
Present Absent
Type 1 diabetes will not be discussed further in these guidelines and they pertain
chiefly to type 2 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes is a metabolic-cum-vascular syndrome characterized by
predominant insulin resistance with varying degrees of insulin secretory defect. It
is a progressive disease often associated with central obesity, dyslipidaemia and
hypertension. It is more common in overweight and obese individuals of middle to
late age but is increasingly being seen in younger age groups and in those with lower
body mass index (BMI) as well. The “Asian Indian phenotype” refers to a peculiar
constellation of abnormalities in south Asians, whereby for any given level of BMI,
they tend to have higher total body fat, visceral fat, insulin resistance and prevalence
of diabetes compared to white Caucasians (Figure 1.1).
Figure 1.1: The “Asian Indian phenotype”
Lower threshold for
BMI for diabetes
Inflammatory
markers; CRP
Increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes / premature CVD
Serum insulin
levels/ insulin
resistance
ASIAN INDIAN
PHENOTYPE
w birth weight – thin fat
Indian
Abdominal
obesity and
visceral fat
Characteristic
HDL cholesterol
triglycerides &
small dense LDL
Levels of adiponectin
Lower age at onset of
Type 2 diabetes
Greater ethnic susceptibility and genetic familial
aggregation of type 2 diabetes
dyslipidemia:
Lo
1.5 Goals for management
z Relief from symptoms of diabetes and improvement in quality of life
z Glycemic control and prevention of acute complications
z Identification and management of comorbid conditions like obesity,
hypertension and dyslipidaemia
z Prevention of microvascular complications like retinopathy, neuropathy and
nephropathy
z Prevention of macro-vascular complications like cardiovascular,
cerebrovascular and peripheral vascular disease
z Prevention of infections
The complete treatment of people with diabetes requires advocating a healthy life
style with focus on increased physical activity and a proper balanced diet in addition
to prescribing medications.
1.6 Diabetes Education
Diabetes education means empowering people with diabetes with knowledge and
providing tools crucial for making them active partners in the diabetes management
team. These include:
z In-depth information about diabetes, its complications and treatment
z Appropriate self care skills
z Appropriate resources for self care
z A positive attitude
z Self monitoring skills
The compliance of people with diabetes is essential for effective management of
diabetes. Education programmes are intended to help people to understand why these
actions are so important and thereby increase their motivation for self-management.
Lo
1.7 Prevention of Diabetes
There is an urgent need for strategies to prevent or at least slow down the emerging
epidemic of diabetes apart from treating diabetes and associated complications.
Several factors are thought to contribute towards the acceleration of the epidemic,
the most important being the rapid epidemiological transition due to urbanization and
life style changes. Identifying individuals at risk is essential in planning preventive
measures. Prevention of diabetes has several windows of opportunities (Figure 1.2).
Figure 1.2: Levels of prevention of diabetes
Normal
glucose
tolerance
Pre
Diabetes
IGT/IFG
Clinical
Diabetes Complications Disability Death
Tertiary
prevention
Secondary
prevention
Primary
prevention
Primordial
prevention
The three stages of prevention are:
1.7.1 Primordial prevention attempts to reduce the risk factors for diabetes, e.g.,
reducing or preventing obesity to reduce the future risk of diabetes.
1.7.2 Primary prevention targets people who are in the stage of prediabetes
to prevent the onset of diabetes. All people with prediabetes should be regularly
screened and encouraged at each health care visit to pursue a healthy life-style,
including a healthy diet, adequate exercise and weight control in order to prevent
diabetes. Several studies including from India have shown that diabetes can be
prevented in up to a third of people with prediabetes. When lifestyle alone is not
sufficient and especially in those with combined IFG and IGT where progression to
type 2 diabetes appear imminent, use of metformin in addition to lifestyle measures
may be considered especially in Indians who progress rapidly to diabetes from the
prediabetes stage.
1.7.3 Secondary prevention is to prevent the onset of complications in those
who are already diagnosed to have diabetes. This can be achieved by meticulous
control of diabetes with the help of diet, physical activity, life style modification and
antihyperglycaemic drugs as indicated. Control should include holistic care beyond
glycemic control i.e. attention to blood pressure, lipids etc.
1.7.4 Tertiary prevention of diabetes is aimed at limiting physical disability and
rehabilitation measures in those who have already developed diabetic complications
and preventing them from going into end stage complications of diabetes.
SECTION 2 SCREENING FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES
Type 2 diabetes occurs a much earlier age (at least a decade earlier) in Indians
compared to other major ethnic groups. Screening of asymptomatic individuals
allows diagnosis of diabetes and prediabetes to be made at an earlier stage and
thus appropriate management can be instituted. In addition, it provides an opportunity
for screening of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factors and the institution of
interventions for their control. Early detection of diabetes has been shown to improve
outcomes.
2.1 Whom and when to screen?
Screening should be performed in all individuals >30 years of age. It should be carried
out at an earlier age in adults who have one or more of the following risk factors:
z Family history of diabetes
z Overweight/obese (BMI ≥23 kg/m 2) or have increased waist circumference
(>90 cm males, >80 cm females)
z History of hypertension (≥130/80 mmHg) or on treatment for hypertension
z History of dyslipidaemia
z Sedentary physical activity
z History of gestational diabetes or macrosomia (birth weight > 3.5 kg)
z History of CVD (ischaemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease)
z History of polycystic ovarian syndrome and/or acanthosis nigricans
2.2 How to screen?
Screening can be done by fasting plasma glucose, an oral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT) using 75 gm glucose or a random plasma glucose. Glycosylated (glycated)
haemoglobin (HbA1c) is also recommended for screening; however, in India there are
some limitations regarding its use.
2.3 Where to screen?
Preferably, screening should be done in a health care setting. Alternatively,
community screening can also be done.
2.4 Retesting:
Retesting should be done after 3 years in case of normal glucose tolerance. In
case of prediabetes, it should be done annually.
2.5 Other aspects:
CVD risk factors such as hypertension, dyslipidemia, tobacco use and case of
sedentary lifestyle should be identified and treated.
SECTION 3 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
3.1 Diagnostic Criteria for Diabetes
z Symptoms of diabetes (see Section 3.2) plus casual or random plasma
glucose ≥ 200 mg/dl (Casual means without regard to time of last meal)
z Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 126 mg/dl*
z 2 hour post 75 g glucose ≥ 200 mg/dl (as part of OGTT)*
z Glycated Haemoglobin ≥ 6.5%*
*Diabetes diagnosed using any of these criteria should be confirmed with another
test subsequently.
3.2 Symptoms of Diabetes
z Osmotic symptoms- polyuria, polydipsia
z Weight loss in spite of polyphagia
z Tiredness, weakness
z Generalised pruritus
z Recurrent urogenital infections
z Delayed healing of wounds
More than half of all patients with diabetes will have no symptoms at all
3.3 Criteria for the Diagnosis of Prediabetes
The term “prediabetes” refers to a situation where the blood glucose levels
are higher than normal, but not high enough to warrant a diagnosis of diabetes.
Prediabetes consists of two entities viz. impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and impaired
gluose tolerance (IGT).
The diagnostic criteria for diabetes and prediabetes are summarized in
Table 3.1
Table 3.1: Diagnostic criteria for diabetes and prediabetes
Parameter Normoglycemia(mg/dl) Prediabetes (mg/dl) Diabetes (mg/dl)
WHO ADA WHO ADA
FPG < 110 < 100 110-125
(IFG)
100-125
(IFG) ≥ 126
2-h PG < 140 140-199 (IGT) ≥ 200
HbA1c < 5.7% 5.7-6.4% ≥ 6.5%
Random
plasma
glucose*
≥ 200 (with
symptoms of
diabetes)
* Individuals with random plasma glucose between 140-199mg/dl are recommended to undergo OGTT
WHO - World Health Organisation; ADA-American Diabetes Association; IFG - Impaired Fasting Glucose;
IGT - Impaired Glucose tolerance; FPG - Fasting Plasma Glucose; 2-h PG-2 hour post load Glucose test
(oral glucose tolerance test) plasma glucose; HbA1c – Glycosylated Haemoglobin
3.4 Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT)
z Person to be tested should be on a normal diet (with at least 200 g carbohydrate/
day) for at least 3 days before the test
z The test should be done after an overnight fast of 8-10 hours and comprises
of two blood samples: fasting and 2 hours after glucose load
z Following the collection of the fasting blood sample for analysis of plasma
glucose, the individual should be administered 75 g of glucose (1.75 g/ kg
body weight for children to a maximum of 75 g) dissolved in at least 250 ml of
water. The glucose load should be drunk within a period of 5 minutes
The second sample should be collected 2 hours after the glucose load is given.
The subject should be resting and refrain from smoking and eating in between the two
sample collections.
3.5 Testing for Type 2 Diabetes in Children and Adolescents
Children and adolescents aged 18 years and below should be screened for
diabetes if they are overweight (weight>120% of ideal body weight) and have any of
the following risk factors:
z Family history of type 2 diabetes in first degree relatives
z Signs of insulin resistance (Acanthosis nigricans)
z Hypertension
z Dyslipidaemia
z Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS)
SECTION 4 TARGETS FOR CONTROL OF DIABETES
Any target is only a general guideline, and individualized targets are to be
established. Tight glycemic control is essential in the early stages of diabetes,
especially in the young to prevent complications. With the onset of complications
and in the elderly, targets need to be revised based on the condition of the patient.
4.1 Targets for metabolic control in diabetes
Blood glucose, blood pressure, BMI, waist circumference and lipid targets for a
patient with diabetes are listed in Table 4.1 and Table 4.2 below.
Table 4.1: Targets for metabolic control in diabetes
Ideal Satisfactory Unsatisfactory
Fasting Plasma Glucose (mg/dl) 80 -110 111 - 125 > 125
2 hour Postprandial Glucose
(mg/dl) 120 - 140 141 - 180 > 180
Blood pressure (mm Hg) < 130/80 < 140/90 > 140/90
Body Mass Index (kg/m2) 20 - 23 23.1 - 25 > 25
Waist (cm)
Men < 90
Women < 80
Glycated Haemoglobin [HbAlc]
(%) < 7 7 - < 8 8
Table 4.2 Targets for lipid control in diabetes
Total Cholesterol (mg/dl) < 200
HDL Cholesterol (mg/dl) > 40 for men
> 50 for women
LDL Cholesterol (mg/dl) < 100*
Non-HDL Cholesterol(mg/dl) <130
Triglycerides (mg/dl) <150
*For those at high risk (established CVD, smoking, obesity, hypertension, family
history of premature CVD and evidence of other vascular disease), LDL cholesterol
<70mg/dl is recommended
4.2. Glycemic targets during pregnancy
Tight glycemic control is most essential during pregnancy. Glycemic targets during
pregnancy are presented in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Glycemic targets during pregnancy
Ideal
Fasting Plasma Glucose (mg/dl) <90
1 hour Postprandial Glucose (mg/dl) <140
2 hour Postprandial Glucose (mg/dl) <120
Physician may request for either for a 1 hour or 2 hour postprandial blood glucose
value for purposes of monitoring.

SECTION 5 MONITORING AND FOLLOW UP OF PEOPLE WITH DIABETES
5.1 How to Monitor and Follow up People with Diabetes?
z Blood glucose - FPG and 2 hr PPPG at least once a month and more often if
values are not in the ideal target range
z HbA1c at least every 6-12 months and more often (every 3 months) if values
are not in the ideal target range, or tight control is being attempted
z Clinical examination needs to be done during every visit--- minimum every 3
months
z Screening for long term complications like retinopathy, nephropathy,
neuropathy, peripheral vascular disease (PVD) and coronary artery disease
(CAD) at least once a year, more often if needed (see Section 8)
z Optimizing weight, waist, blood pressure, lipids
z Routine examination of foot to be done during every visit & education regarding
foot care to be given to patients in each visit
z Discourage tobacco use and excess use of alcohol
Urine glucose monitoring is not recommended. Urine examination for estimation of
ketones should be done if blood glucose is greater than 400 mg/dl.
5.2 Self Monitoring of Blood Glucose (SMBG) with Glucose Monitor
It is indicated in the following conditions:
z Ideal for every patient to achieve better control of diabetes
z All people with diabetes on insulin
z Brittle diabetes
z Those prone to ketosis/recurrent hypoglycaemia
z Hypoglycaemia unawareness
z Whenever tight control is indicated — pregnancy, acute illness and
complications
z Frequency of SMBG should be individualised (e.g. with greater frequency in
pregnancy)
5.3 What to do during Annual Check-Up?
z Basic clinical exam including detailed foot exam with palpation of dorsalis
pedis and posterior tibial pulses, monofilament and vibration perception
testing (VPT) (See Section 8)
z Retinal check-up (fundus examination for retinopathy)
z Blood urea / serum creatinine
z Urine — protein/albumin, micro-albuminuria if available or at least Urinary
Albumin by dipstick
z ECG
z Lipids
z Hemogram
z Urine routine
z Diet/ exercise to be reinforced
z Psychological support whenever necessary
z Tests to be carried out when indicated: X Ray chest, uric acid, TSH, SGOT,
SGPT, vitamin B12, electrolytes, ultrasound abdomen
Advanced monitoring can be done if required in case of recurrent hypoglycaemia,
severe fluctuations in blood glucose, disparity in measured glucose values and
HbA1c, severe anaemia, haemoglobinopathy, hypoglycaemia unawareness etc. Here
Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM) for 5-7 days or iSCGM (intermittently scanned
CGM) for 14 days may be used.
SECTION 6 NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES
6.1. Lifestyle Goals in Diabetes
z To improve health through optimum nutrition
z To provide energy for reasonable body weight , normal growth and development
z To maintain glycemic control
z To achieve optimum blood lipid levels
z To individualise the diet according to complications and co-morbidities
z Achieve optimal physical activity
z Advise other behavioural changes for: smoking, other tobacco products and
alcohol
z Advocate stress management
6.2 Medical Nutrition Therapy (MNT) for diabetes mellitus requires application of
nutritional and behavioral sciences along with physical activity.
We need a four-pronged approach:
z Nutritional assessment which includes metabolic, nutritional and life style
parameters
z Setting goals – practical, achievable and acceptable to the patient-individualised
z Nutritional Intervention, including nutrition education – individualized meal
plans according to family eating patterns
z Evaluation – to assess if the goals have been achieved and to make necessary
changes
Based on factors like age, sex, physical activity, height, weight, body mass index
(BMI) and cultural factors, the diet is planned. The diet should be individualized, close
to the family pattern, flexible, should have variety and meal timing should be according
to the patient’s daily schedule.
6.2.1 Dietary Recommendations:
(i) Energy:
Sufficient to attain or maintain a reasonable body weight for adults, normal growth
and development for children and adolescents, to meet the increased needs during
pregnancy and lactation and recovery from illness. Daily physical activity and exercise
needs to be considered.
Ideal Body Weight (IBW) = (Height in cm – 100) * 0.9.
Approximately, 25 kcals/kg ideal body weight/day can be given to a moderately
active patient with diabetes. The change in the daily calorie should be a gradual
process, and not more than 500 calories/day.
(ii) Energy or Calorie Distribution:
(a) Carbohydrates:
Evidence is inconclusive for an ideal amount of carbohydrate intake for people
with diabetes. Therefore, collaborative goals should be developed for individuals
with diabetes. 55-60 % of energy from carbohydrates is an ideal recommendation.
Carbohydrates should be complex in nature. Although different carbohydrates produce
different glycemic responses, from clinical point of view it is important to manage total
carbohydrate. It is recommended that carbohydrates from foods high in fibre e.g.
whole grains (unpolished cereals and millets), legumes, peas, beans, oats, barley
and some fruits with low glycemic index and glycemic load are consumed. All patients
with diabetes should be encouraged to take 6 small meals a day. Food exchange
system can be followed to give more variety and individualization to the diet plan.
(a) Fibre:
Fibre recommendation for general population is 40 g/day (2000 Kcals).
Traditional Indian diets that include whole grains along with whole pulses like
grams, soy, green leafy vegetables and some fruits is the recommendation. Fruits like
papaya, guava, apples, pears, oranges, mosambi can be taken in moderation. All fruit
juices are best avoided.
(b) Proteins:
Proteins should provide 12-15 % of the total energy intake for people with diabetes –
similar to the recommendations for the general population.
Proteins from vegetable sources like pulses, soy, grams, peas as well as form low
fat milk, low fat curds, fish and lean meats are recommended.
Supplementation of foods like cereal and pulse (4:1 ratio) can improve the protein
quality and also gives satiety. For e.g; Idli, dosa, Missi roti, Khichdi, Dhokla, Khandvi
etc.
(c) Fats:
Fats should provide 20-30 % of total energy intake for people with diabetes.
Evidence is inconclusive for an ideal amount of total fat intake for people with
diabetes, therefore, goals should be individualized. Fat quality is as important as the
quantity.
Fat quality
z Saturated fats (SFA) ≤10% energy and 7% in those with raised blood lipid
levels
z Polyunsaturated fats (PUFA) 10 % energy, n6: 3-7% energy, n3: >1% energy,
n6/n3 ratio 5-10
z Monounsaturated Fatty Acids (MUFA) 10-15% energy + any calories left from
the carbohydrate portion
z Trans fats < 1% energy – preferably totally avoided
In people with type 2 diabetes, MUFA-rich cooking oil and nuts in moderation may
benefit glycemic control and CVD risk factors. This can therefore be recommended
as an effective alternative to a lower-fat, higher-carbohydrate eating pattern. Use of
MUFA rich oils like mustard, rice bran, peanut (groundnut) and gingelly are good
options. Oils rich in n6 PUFA like safflower, sunflower, cotton seed, should be mixed
with oils rich in n3 like soy and mustard to maintain N6:N3 ratio between 5-10. Use
of mixed oils or alternating of oils is recommended.
(iii) Salt:
Sodium intake recommendations for people with diabetes are the same as that for
the general population. Added (iodized) salt should be less than 5 g/day. For persons
with hypertension and diabetes, the intake should be reduced to less than 3 g/ day.
In hypertensive patients or edematous patients with nephropathy, sodium restriction
is required. All preserved and processed foods such as pickles, chutneys, packaged
namkeens/savouries, sauces should be restricted.
(iv) Alcohol:
It is best to avoid alcohol, however if used, should be taken in moderation. If alcohol
is consumed, it should not be counted as part of the meal plan. However, it should be
borne in mind that alcohol does provide calories (7 kcal/ g), which are considered as
“empty calories”. In the fasting state, alcohol may produce hypoglycaemia. Alcohol
can further exacerbate fatty liver, neuropathy, dyslipidaemia, obesity and also worsen
blood glucose levels.
(v) Sweeteners:
Nutritive Sweeteners : These include fructose, honey, corn syrup, molasses, fruit
juice or fruit juice concentrates dextrose, maltose, mannitol, sorbitol and xylitol.. All
these are best avoided.
Non-nutritive Sweeteners : Aspartame, acesulfame K, stevia, sucralose and
saccharin are currently approved for use. However, they should be used in moderation
and are best avoided in pregnancy.
6.2.2 Dietary modifications in the presence of complications of diabetes:
(i) Nephropathy:
(a) Protein : The recommended protein intake for diabetic nephropathy patients is
0.6 g/kg of the ideal body weight plus 24 hour urinary protein loss, if this is significant.
However, it is recommended that the protein intake should not be less than 40 g/
day. For patients with increased creatinine, protein restriction should be advised in
consultation with the nephrologist.
(b) Sodium: It could vary from 1000 mg to 2000 mg/day depending upon the fluid
status and serum sodium levels.
(c) Potassium: Potassium restriction may be required depending upon the
potassium values in the blood and type of diuretic being used.
(ii) Cardiovascular Disease:
(a) Maintaining an optimal body weight and restricting salt. Use of fruits and
vegetables should be encouraged, with good quality fats in moderation.
(b) Dyslipidaemia : Saturated and trans fats food sources like vanaspati, butter,
ghee, margarine, coconut oil, red meats like sausages, ham, bacon, egg yellow, whole
milk and its products should be restricted. Use of healthy oils and fibre rich foods is
recommended. Vegetarians can take flax seeds (10 g / day) in their diet as both fish
and flax seeds are rich in omega-3 fatty acids which is protective for heart disease.
Alcohol restriction will bring down the triglycerides. Dietary management should be
accompanied with regular physical activity and exercise regimen.
6.2.3 Special situations requiring dietary modification:
(i) Sick Days
In the event of fever or other illness, the diabetic diet should be modified by
changing the consistency and texture of foods to maintain adequate calorie intake.
Semi solid foods and fluids or items like thin soups, milk, buttermilk, or fresh lime juice
should be encouraged.
6.2.4 Lifestyle Management:
(i) Tobacco:
Smoking and tobacco chewing is totally prohibited.
(ii) Stress:
Stress management is essential which could take the form of meditation, yoga, a
long outdoor walk, exercise and trying out hobbies like reading, gardening, painting
etc. Practice of yoga is our traditional Indian system, which has therapeutic value in
controlling our physical and mental health. It should be done under the guidance of
an expert.
6.3 Physical Activity and Exercise
Regular physical activity along with regulated exercise is an essential component of
management of type 2 diabetes. Complete evaluation of patients with diabetes should
be performed before recommending an exercise program. The exercise programme
has to be individualized according to one’s ability and individual capacity.
Benefits of exercise
z Improves insulin sensitivity, reduces the risk of heart disease, high blood
pressure, bone diseases, and unhealthy weight gain
z Keeps one flexible and agile
z Helps relieve stress, anxiety and prevents depression
z Increases strength and stamina
z Promotes sound sleep
z Increases metabolic rate and digestion
z Lowers lipids
z Delays the process of aging
Recommendation is about 150 minutes of aerobic activity or its equivalent /week
along with some resistance training at least twice a week and flexibility exercises.
People with diabetes need an extra quick acting carbohydrate snack before the
exercise and during the exercise, if the exercise period extends the daily-recommended
routine.
6.4 Yoga and Diabetes
The practice of yoga is a traditional Indian system, which has gained international
recognition as a means of developing stress coping skills and is increasingly being
suggested as a part of holistic diabetes management. Some of the aspects used in
yoga are:
• Asanas (involving postures)
• Pranayama (involving breath)
• Dhyana (involving meditation)
While the details of these techniques are beyond the scope of these Guidelines,
there is growing evidence to suggest that yoga may benefit patients with type
2 diabetes. Yogic practices may beneficially impact several aspects of diabetes
management, such as glycemic control, lipids, and body fat content. Other suggested
benefits include reduction in oxidative stress and blood pressure, improvement of
pulmonary and autonomic function, mood, sleep, and quality of life; and reduction
in doses of anti-diabetic medication. However, there is an urgent need for additional
high-quality studies to confirm the potential benefits of yoga as well as its mechanisms
of action in this patient population and some such studies have been initiated.
SECTION 7 PHARMACOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES
This section is divided into
1. Oral anti-hyperglycaemic drugs
2. Insulin therapy
3. Non-insulin injectable therapy
7.1 Anti-Hyperglycaemic Drugs
Blood glucose levels are determined by several factors such as absorption of
glucose from gut, uptake of glucose by peripheral tissues (muscle, adipose tissue),
hepatic glucose output, and secretion of hormones such as insulin and glucagon
from the pancreas and incretins from the gut, as well as renal handling of glucose.
Various anti-hyperglycaemic agents act by modifying the factors aiding in the control
of hyperglycaemia as shown in Figure 7.1. The oral anti-hyperglycaemic agents
currently available in India are listed in Table 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Mechanism of action of anti-hyperglycaemic drugs
HYPERGLYCEMIA
Brain
(Neurotransmitter

dysfunction)

Adipose tissue
(Increased lipolysis and

decreased glucose

TZD
TZD
Metformin
Skeletal muscle
(Decreased glucose
Liver
(Increased glucose
production)
Metformin
TZD
Kidney
(Increased glucose reabsorption)
Gut
(Decreased incretin effect)
SGLT2i
GLP 1RA / DPP 4i Metformin
AGI
GLP 1 RA
DPP 4i
Pancreatic α cell
(Increased glucagon
secretion)
Pancreatic cell
(Impaired insulin
secretion)
SU
Glinide
DPP 4i / GLP1 RA
GLP 1 RA
Bromocriptine
uptake)
uptake)
Only the major pathophysiology at each site is depicted
Legend: SU- Sulfphonylureas; DPP4i- Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (Gliptins); GLP-1RA- Glucagon-like peptide-1
receptor agonists; TZD- Thiazolidinediones (Glitazones); AGI- Alpha-glucosidase inhibitor; Glinide- Non-sulphonylurea
insulin secretagogue (Repaglinide and Nateglinide); SGLT2i- Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor
Table 7.1: Oral anti-hyperglycaemic agents currently available in India
BIGUANIDES
Drug name
Daily dosage
range (minmax) (mg)
Frequency
per day
Duration of
action (hrs)
Predominant
mode of
excretion
Metformin 250 - 2500 1 - 3 4 - 8 Urine
Metformin SR 500 – 2500 1 - 2 18-24 Urine
SULPHONYLUREAS
Drug name
Daily dosage
range (minmax) (mg)
Frequency
per day
Duration of
action (hrs)
Predominant
mode of
excretion
Glibenclamide 2.5 -20 1 -2 16 - 24 Urine (50%)
Bile (50%)
Glipizide 2.5 - 20 1 - 3 8 - 12 Urine (80%)
Bile (20%)
Glipizide
modified
release
5 - 20 1 24 Urine (80%)
Bile (20%)
Gliclazide 80 - 320 1 - 2 8 - 12 Urine (80%)
Bile (20%)
Gliclazide
modified
release
30 - 120 1 24 Urine (80%)
Bile (20%)
Glimepiride 1 - 8 1 16 - 24 Urine (60%)
Bile (40%)
Newer agents like Glimepiride and Gliclazide are preferred nowadays.
DPP - 4 INHIBITORS
Drug name
Daily dosage
range (minmax) (mg)
Frequency
per day
Duration of
action (hrs)
Predominant
mode of
excretion
Sitagliptin 25-100 1 24 Urine (87%),
Faeces (13%)
Vildagliptin 25-50 1 - 2 3-12 Urine (85%),
Faeces (15%)
Saxagliptin 2.5 - 5 1 2.5*
Renal (24 - 75%)
and remaining
hepatic excretion
Linagliptin 5 1 24 Entero-hepatic
excretion
Teneligliptin 20 – 40 1 24 Faeces (46.5%),
Renal (45%)
Gemigliptin 50 1 18 - 24 Urine (63.4%)
Faeces (27.1%)
* Active metabolite acts for up to 24 hours
THIAZOLIDINEDIONES (GLITAZONES)
Drug name
Daily dosage
range (minmax) (mg)
Frequency
per day
Duration of
action (hrs)
Predominant
mode of
excretion
Pioglitazone 7.5 - 30 1 16 - 24
Urine (15 - 30%),
remaining in
faeces
SGLT 2 Inhibitors
Drug name
Daily dosage
range (minmax) (mg)
Frequency
per day
Duration of
action (hrs)
Predominant
mode of
excretion
Canagliflozin 100 - 300 1 24 Urine (33%),
Faeces (41.5 %)
Dapagliflozin 5 - 10 1 24 Urine (75%),
Faeces (15%)
Empagliflozin 10 - 25 1 24 Urine (54.4%),
Faeces (41.2%)
ALPHA GLUCOSIDASE INHIBITORS
Drug name
Daily dosage
range (minmax) (mg)
Frequency
per day
Duration of
action (hrs)
Predominant
mode of
excretion
Acarbose 25 - 150 1 - 3 2 Renal (2%) and
rest metabolised
Voglibose 0.2 - 0.9 1- 3 1 - 1.5 Urine (5%),
Faeces (95%)
Miglitol 25 - 150 1 - 3 2 - 3 Renal (95%)
Non-sulphonylurea Secretagogues (Glinides)
Drug name
Daily dosage
range (minmax) (mg)
Frequency
per day
Duration of
action (hrs)
Predominant
mode of
excretion
Repaglinide 0.5 - 6 3 1 Faeces (90%),
Renal (8%)
Nateglinide 60 – 360 3 1.5 Urine (83%),
Faeces (10%)
In addition, various fixed dose combinations (FDC) are also available although the
Drug Controller of India (DCGI) does not favour FDCs particularly those consisting of
more than two drugs.
7.1.1 Biguanides:
Metformin is the only biguanide available in clinical practice. It mediates its effect
by enhancing sensitivity of the liver and peripheral tissues to circulating insulin. The
recommended starting daily dose is 500 mg after meals, which may be increased by
500 mg every two weeks until desired therapeutic goals are achieved or maximum
daily doses (2500 mg) are reached. It can be used in combination with any other oral
or injectable anti-hyperglycaemic agents. Metformin rarely produces hypoglycaemia
when used as monotherapy. It is also associated with weight loss and is hence
recommended as the first line treatment in type 2 diabetes. Metformin has a favorable
effect on lipids by decreasing triglycerides. It is advisable to stop metformin at least 24
hours before elective major surgery or use of radiocontrast media. Metformin should
be withdrawn if any contraindications to its use occur.
(a) Side effects:
z Gastrointestinal side effects like abdominal discomfort and diarrhoea may
occur in some patients. These can be minimized if metformin is administered
after meals with slow titration of doses and with the use of sustained release
preparations
z Lactic acidosis is a rare side effect and is very uncommon unless metformin is
given in the presence of contraindications, given below
z Prolonged use of metformin may be associated with vitamin B12 deficiency
(b) Contraindications:
z Renal insufficiency (see Box)
z Hepatic insufficiency
z Respiratory insufficiency and other hypoxemic conditions
z Acute myocardial infarction
z Congestive cardiac failure
z Alcohol abuse
z Ketoacidosis
z Severe infections
METFORMIN IN RENAL INSUFFICIENCY
The dose of metformin needs adjustment based on the patient’s renal function,
as assessed by the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). Metformin can be
given in full doses if the eGFR is above 60 ml/min. If the eGFR is between 45 and
60 ml/min, the drug can be continued at full dose with more frequent monitoring of
renal function. Below 45 ml/min, the dose should be halved and no patient started
anew on metformin; the drug should be stopped if the eGFR drops below 30 ml/min.
7.1.2 Sulphonylureas:
The sulphonylureas (glibenclamide, glipizide, gliclazide and glimepiride) bind to
specific sulphonylurea receptors on pancreatic β-cells and increase insulin secretion.
Therapy should be initiated with the lowest effective dose and titrated upwards every
two weeks until the desired control or maximal dosage is reached. Sulphonylureas
are preferably given 15 to 30 minutes before meals. They can be combined with all
other anti-hyperglycaemic agents except glinides and other sulphonylureas. Various
clinical trials have failed to conclusively demonstrate superiority of one sulphonylurea
over the other, when used in optimal doses. In individual cases, switching from one
sulphonylurea to another may show some benefit, but this may not be long lasting.
(a) Factors to be considered when evaluating non-responsiveness to
sulphonylureas:
z Weight gain
z Non-compliance to diet and exercise
z Poor compliance to drugs
z Inadequate dosage
z Impaired absorption
z Co-existing endocrine disorders such as thyroid disease
z Concomitant medications such as steroids
z Infections, stress
(b) Side effects:
Hypoglycaemia is the commonest side effect of sulphonylurea therapy. It is more
likely to be prolonged and profound with older and long acting sulphonylureas like
glibenclamide and hence they should be used with extreme caution in the elderly. The
other side effects are:
z Weight gain
z Photosensitivity reactions (hyperpigmentation of exposed parts) may occur
z Rarely, skin rashes, leucopenia, anaemia, thrombocytopenia, cholestatic
jaundice, Stevens-Johnson syndrome or granulomatous hepatitis may occur
(c) Contraindications:
z Type 1 diabetes
z Renal insufficiency
z Hepatic insufficiency, acute hepatitis
z Ketoacidosis
z Acute myocardial infarction
z Extensive infections (e.g. disseminated tuberculosis)
z History of adverse reactions to sulphonylureas
7.1.3 Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors (Gliptins):
These agents work by inhibiting the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase-4, which breaks
down the incretin hormones glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and glucose dependent
insulinotropic peptide (GIP) secreted from the gut in response to a meal. Increase in
blood levels of incretin hormones stimulates glucose-dependent insulin secretion from
the beta cells of the pancreas and suppression of glucagon release from the alpha
cells. The main advantages of gliptins are that they do not cause hypoglycaemia when
used as monotherapy and are weight-neutral. Sitagliptin, vildagliptin, saxagliptin,
linagliptin, teneligliptin and gemigliptin are the DPP-4 inhibitors available in India at
present. Most of the gliptins are used as a single daily dose except vildagliptin which
is used twice a day. Gliptins are best used in combination with metformin as second
line of therapy. They can also be used as monotherapy or in combination with any
other oral antihyperglycaemic agent or insulin. The dosage should be reduced in
the presence of renal insufficiency except in the case of linagliptin, teneligliptin and
gemigliptin (the latter two to be used with caution in advanced renal disease).
(a) Side effects:
z Gastrointestinal problems – including nausea, diarrhoea and stomach pain
z Flu-like symptoms – headache, runny nose, sore throat
z Skin reactions – painful skin followed by a red or purple rash
z Joint pains
(b) Contraindications:
z Acute pancreatitis
z Dose of sitagliptin, vildagliptin and saxagliptin should be reduced in renal
impairment, teneligliptin and gemigliptin should be used with caution in
advanced renal disease (linagliptin can be continued at unchanged doses)
z Allergic reactions to gliptins
z Saxagliptin should be avoided in cardiac failure
7.1.4 SGLT2 Inhibitors (Sodium Glucose Transporter 2 inhibitors):
Canagliflozin, dapagliflozin and empagliflozin are the agents in this class available
in India at present. They inhibit SGLT2 located on the proximal convoluted tubule
of the kidney thus causing glycosuria. In addition to reducing blood glucose levels,
these agents also cause weight loss and reduction of blood pressure. There is also
some evidence that these agents have cardiovascular benefits over and above their
glucose lowering effects.
(a) Side effects:
z Genital mycotic infections
z Urinary tract infections
z Polyuria
z Volume depletion in elderly persons
z Euglycemic ketoacidosis
z Lower extremity amputations have been reported with canagliflozin
(b) Contraindications:
z Recurrent genitourinary infections
z Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis
z Type 1 diabetes
z Hypersensitivity
7.1.5. Thiazolidinediones (Glitazones):
Pioglitazone is the only agent in this category available in India at present. It is
an insulin sensitizer at adipose tissue and skeletal muscle. This effect is brought
about by its binding to nuclear peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma
(PPAR-y). It also inhibits hepatic glucose output. Pioglitazone has partial PPARalpha agonist activity, which accounts for its beneficial effects on lipid profile. The
dose of pioglitazone commonly used in clinical practice ranges from 7.5 to 30 mg
once a day. The action sets in from 2-4 weeks of starting therapy and the maximum
effect is observed after 8-12 weeks. Pioglitazone can be combined with all other
antihyperglycaemic agents; however, combination with insulin should be done with
caution. Women with anovulatory cycles may ovulate when using pioglitazone; hence,
adequate contraceptive advice should be given.
(a) Side effects:
z Weight gain may be quite significant and is dose- related
z Edema and cardiac failure are reported especially when combined with insulin
z Other adverse events include anaemia and haemodilution
z Higher risk of fractures especially in post-menopausal women
z Bladder cancer has been reported on prolonged use
(b) Contraindications and cautions:
z Type 1 diabetes
z History of cardiac failure
z Pregnancy and lactation
z Moderate to severe anaemia
z History of bladder cancer or those with unexplained hematuria; known risk
factors for bladder cancer to be assessed before starting pioglitazone
z Use with caution in elderly and avoid use as first-line agent
z Review use after 3 to 6 months and withdraw if clinical benefit not seen
7.1.6 Non-sulphonylurea Insulin Secretagogues (Glinides):
Repaglinide and nateglinide are non-sulphonylurea insulin secretagogues. They
are benzoic acid derivatives, which act on separate non-sulphonylurea receptor
binding sites on the β-cell and enhance insulin secretion. These agents are absorbed
rapidly (0.5-1 hr) and have a short half life (<1 hr). Thus, they result in rapid but brief
release of insulin, and hence may be useful in managing postprandial hyperglycaemia.
They have to be administered with each meal.
z They produce fewer and milder hypoglycaemic episodes and other side effects
compared to sulphonylureas
z The indications and contraindications for these agents are similar to
sulphonylureas
z They may be used in mild renal insufficiency and elderly under supervision
z There is no indication for combining these drugs with sulfonylureas
7.1.7 Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors:
Alpha- glucosidase inhibitors (AGI) (acarbose, miglitol and voglibose) act by
competitively inhibiting alpha-glucosidase, the enzyme in the small intestine brush
border which breaks down oligosaccharides and disaccharides into mono-saccharides.
Thus, the absorption of glucose is delayed. AGIs are especially useful in decreasing
post-prandial glucose levels. They can be combined with all other oral and injectable
anti-hyperglycaemic agents. These agents should be started with the minimum dose
at any one meal and then increased to the maximum tolerable dose. They must be
ingested with the first bite of food, as the drug must be present in the small bowel
with the food for proper effect. Hypoglycaemia rarely occurs if used as monotherapy.
If hypoglycaemia results from combination therapy of which AGI is a component,
treatment should be with oral glucose rather than sucrose.
(a) Side effects: Gastrointestinal side effects like bloating, abdominal discomfort,
diarrhoea and flatulence are common.
(b) Contraindications:
z Inflammatory bowel disease
z Cirrhosis of liver
z Malabsorption syndromes
z Moderate to End Stage Renal Disease
7.1.8 Other oral anti-hyperglycaemic agents:
The disease-modifying antirheumatoid drug hydroxychloroquine and the dopamine
agonist bromocriptine are also approved for use as antihyperglycaemic agents in
India. The role of these agents in the therapeutic algorithm for type 2 diabetes needs
further study. The dual PPARα/γ agonist saroglitazar is only licensed for use in diabetic
dyslipidaemia in India and not as an antihyperglycaemic agent.
7.1.9 General Guidelines for using oral anti-hyperglycaemic agents:
Type 2 diabetes is a heterogeneous disease and hence treatment should be
individualized. In every case, due emphasis should be given to encouraging healthy
lifestyle choices such as increasing physical activity and modification of diet. In some
cases, lifestyle changes alone would suffice to attain therapeutic targets. However,
most patients with type 2 diabetes will need pharmacotherapy for achieving their
glycemic goals.
To help the practitioner in selecting the optimal antihyperglycaemic agent, we
present below a table showing the important advantages and the disadvantages of
each class of agent (Figure 7.2) and a suggested algorithm for their use (Figure 7.3).
Figure 7.2: Pros and cons influencing the choice of anti-hyperglycaemic agent
following metformin monotherapy
AGENT PROS CONS
Sulphonylureas Potent agents
Inexpensive
H y p o g l y c a e m i a
Weight gain
DPP-4 Inhibitors Low risk of
hypoglycaemia
Favourable side-effect
profile
Weight neutral
Expensive
SGLT2 inhibitors Low risk of
hypoglycaemia
Reduces body weight
and blood pressure
E x p e n s i v e
Risk of genitourinary
infection
Thiazolidinediones Low risk of
hypoglycaemia
Inexpensive
We i g h t g a i n
F l u i d o v e r l o a d
Risk of heart failure
Fractures
AGIs Low risk of
hypoglycaemia
Weight neutral
Postprandial glucose
regulator
No effect on fasting
glucose
GI side effects
Glinides Prandial glucose
regulator
Lower risk of
hypoglycaemia
compared to SU
Less potent
No effect on fasting
glucose
Expensive
GLP-1 RAs Low risk of
hypoglycaemia
Weight loss
R e q u i r e s i n j e c t i o n
GI side effects
Expensive
Figure 7.3: Suggested algorithm for use of anti-hyperglycaemic agents
Diagnosis of diabetes
Lifestyle modification for
all
HbA1c < 9% HbA1c > 9%

Symptomatic Consider
insulin *
Asymptomatic
Consider
dual OHA
therapy
HbA1c not at
target
HbA1c at
target
Continue
monitor ***
SU DPP 4
inhibitors
SGLT2
inhibitors
First choice Second choice
AGI Glinides TZD GLP1
RA
HbA1c not at
target
HbA1c at
target
Continue
monitor ***
Add insulin
triple oral Rx in
selected cases
Dual therapy Metformin plus
Monotherapy with metformin **
Consider
&
&
Legend: SU- Sulfphonylureas; DPP4i- Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (Gliptins); GLP-1RA- Glucagonlike peptide-1 receptor agonists; TZD- Thiazolidinediones (Glitazones); AGI- Alpha-glucosidase inhibitor;
Glinide- Non-sulphonylurea insulin secretagogue (Repaglinide and Nateglinide); SGLT2i- Sodiumglucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor
* with or without oral agents
** If metformin is contraindicated, monotherapy can be initiated with any of the other classes of oral agents
*** Monitor for continued efficacy of drug as well as for development of side-effects
z In practice, majority of patients will require pharmacotherapy at time of
diagnosis along with lifestyle modification
z If the initial blood glucose levels are very high, the symptoms are very severe
or acute complications like ketosis are present, insulin should be considered
even at the onset at least for a brief period for early achievement of euglycemia
z If the initial assessment shows presence of complications like diabetic
retinopathy or nephropathy, this indicates a long period of undiagnosed
diabetes and insulin therapy on a continuous basis should be considered
z With increasing duration of diabetes, most oral anti-hyperglycaemic agents
tend to become less effective and hence poly-pharmacy becomes inevitable,
with use of drugs from multiple classes. However, insulin use should not
be delayed and whenever necessary, insulin should be introduced for tight
glycemic control
7.1.10 Combination of oral drugs with insulin:
When glycemic control is not achieved with the maximum tolerable dose of a single
oral agent or combination of oral drugs, combination of oral drugs and insulin can help
to achieve good control of diabetes. Oral drugs may be continued in optimal doses,
while intermediate acting/long acting/short acting insulin is added either at bedtime or
in the morning depending on the blood glucose profile of the patient. When premixed
or multiple dose insulin is given, consideration may be given to reducing the dose of
secretagogues or stopping them altogether.
7.1.11 Use of Indigenous Drugs:
Many people with diabetes in our country use indigenous drugs from other
systems of medicine like Ayurveda, Homeopathy, Unani etc. Several herbal products
have been advocated for the treatment of diabetes such as Pterocarpus marsupium,
Gymnema sylvestre, Mormordica chirantica, Eugenia jambolana etc. These drugs by
themselves or in combination, do have blood glucose lowering effects. Their exact
mechanism of action is still not clear. There is a common belief that all herbal drugs
are safe and non-toxic which is not necessarily true.
In view of the widespread use of these indigenous medicines, physicians should
be aware of the herb-drug interactions. There is ample scope for research and careful
evaluation of these agents needs to be done in the management of diabetes.
7.2 Insulin therapy
Insulin is the mainstay of therapy in type 1 diabetes. However, many patients with
type 2 diabetes will also require insulin injections to help them achieve their glycemic
targets.
7.2.1 Indications for the use of insulin in type 2 diabetes mellitus at the time of
diagnosis:
z Person with diabetes with significant, symptomatic hyperglycaemia, loss of
weight and polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia
z Fasting plasma glucose > 270 mg/dl or HbA1c >9%
z Severe infections
z Presence of ketosis
7.2.2 Other situations where insulin is indicated:
z Patients not responding to optimal doses of oral anti-hyperglycaemic agents
alone or in combination
z Acute hyperglycaemia, diabetic ketoacidosis / hyperglycemic-hyperosmolar
state / lactic acidosis
z Stressful situations such as acute myocardial infarction, stroke, acute
infections, tuberculosis*,trauma and other conditions requiring hospitalisation
z Pregnancy and lactation
z Peri-operative state
z Intolerant / contraindications to OHA
z Hepatic and renal failure
z Renal transplantation - Oral agents can be used
z Person with diabetes on steroids
* Decision left to discretion of treating physician
7.2.3 Types of insulin preparations:
Different types of insulin are available. They have different pharmacokinetic
properties. Insulin type, injection technique, insulin antibodies, site of injection and
individual patient response differences can affect the onset, degree and duration of
insulin activity.
Human insulin manufactured by rDNA technology and insulin analogues are the
only insulins available at present. Animal insulin is no longer available.
(i) Human insulin:
z Short acting – human soluble insulin (regular)
z Intermediate acting – neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH)
z Premixed- mixtures of regular and NPH insulin in 25/75, 30/70, 50/50 proportion
(ii) Insulin Analogues:
z Rapid acting (e.g. Lispro, Aspart, Glulisine)
z Long acting (Glargine, Degludec, Detemir)
z Premixed Insulin analogue (Lispro/ lispro protamine, aspart/ aspart protamine)
z Co-formulations (Degludec + Aspart insulin)
Insulin degludec/insulin aspart (IDegAsp) is a soluble formulation of the novel
basal analogue insulin degludec(70%) and insulin aspart (IAsp: 30%)
7.2.4 Insulin action profiles (Figure 7.4):
Figure 7.4: Insulin Profiles After Subcutaneous Injections
7.2.5 Storage of insulin:
z Insulin not in use should be refrigerated in the lower compartment of the door
of the refrigerator. It should not be kept in the freezer compartment. Ideal
storage temperature is 2-8° C
z Insulin should not be exposed to direct sunlight / heat
z Excess agitation should be avoided to prevent loss of potency, clumping,
frosting or precipitation
z If refrigeration is not available, insulin should be stored in a cool place – e.g.,
in an earthenware pot of water (inside a plastic bag)
z If regular insulin shows haziness, it should not be used. If cloudy insulin cannot
be re-suspended, it should not be used
7.2.6 Mixing of insulin:
z Administration of mixtures of short and intermediate insulin will produce better
glycemic control than use of single insulin in some patients
z Regular and NPH insulin can be mixed but must be injected immediately after
mixing
Sequence of mixing insulin is shown in Figure 7.5
Figure 7.5: Procedure for mixing insulin
z Before each injection, the hands and the injection site should be cleaned
z The top of the insulin vial should be wiped with spirit
z For cloudy insulin preparations (NPH and human and analogue premixes),
the vial should be gently rolled in the palms of the hands (not shaken) to
re-suspend the insulin
z An amount of air equal to the dose of insulin required should first be drawn
up and injected into the vial to avoid creating a vacuum
z For a mixed dose, putting sufficient air into both bottles before drawing up
the dose is important
z In case, insulin has to be mixed in the same syringe (the mixing of rapid or
short acting insulin with NPH), the clear rapid or short acting insulin should
be drawn into the syringe first
7.2.7 Use of syringes:
z Conventional insulin administration involves subcutaneous injection with
syringes marked in insulin units
z There may be differences in the way units are indicated (U-40, U-100) and in
India, both are available in 1 ml syringe. Fixed needle (single unit) syringes
are desirable
z It is important to make sure that there is no syringe-vial mismatch as far as
insulin concentration is concerned e.g. U-40 syringe must be used only for
U-40 insulin
z Syringes and needles must never be shared with another person
z If reuse is planned, the needle must be carefully recapped after each use. The
needle should not be wiped or washed
z Change needles after 3-4 uses, otherwise there is a risk of needle getting
infected
7.2.8 Insulin administration:
(i) Insulin pens:
z Several pen-like devices and insulin containing cartridges are available that
deliver insulin subcutaneously through a needle
z They are easy to use
(ii) Insulin pumps:
z Insulin pump for continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion is available in India
with integrated algorithm, which can automatically stop release of insulin thirty
minutes before onset of hypoglycemia. It is indicated for those with brittle
diabetes, multiple dose injections and recurrent episodes of hypoglycaemia
z Its use may be restricted to diabetes specialists with relevant experience
The main problems associated with insulin use are hypoglycaemia and weight gain.
Weight gain can be significant and is generally well correlated with the total daily dose
of insulin. Used needles must be disposed off in a bio-safe manner. For initiating insulin,
it is not necessary to hospitalize the patient. It can be done on outpatient basis.
Insulin colour coding:
Grey - Intermediate
Yellow - regular insulin
Green - NPH
Brown - Premix insulin
(iii) Injection procedure (Figure 7.6):
z Injections are given into the subcutaneous tissue
z Inject insulin by lifting up a fold of skin and inject at a 90°° angle
z Thin individuals or children may need to pinch the skin and inject at a 45°
angle to avoid intramuscular injection, especially in the thigh area
Figure 7.6 Procedure for injecting insulin

(iv) Injection site:
z Insulin may be injected into the subcutaneous tissue of the upper arm, the
anterior and lateral aspects of the thigh, the buttocks and the abdomen. For
self injection, abdomen and thigh are the convenient sites
z Rotation of the injection site is important to prevent lipohypertrophy or
lipoatrophy. Rotating within one area is recommended (e.g. rotating injections
systematically within the abdomen) rather than rotating to a different area with
each injection. This practice may decrease variability in absorption from day
to day
z Site selection should take into consideration the variable absorption between
sites. The abdomen has the fastest rate of absorption followed by the arms,
thighs and buttocks
z Exercise increases the rate of absorption from the injection sites
z The most commonly recommended interval between injection of short acting
(regular) / premixed insulin and a meal is 30 min. However, insulin analogues
can be given along with or even after a meal
Figure 7.7 Recommended sites for insulin injection

(v) Adverse effects associated with insulin use:
z The main problems associated with insulin use are hypoglycaemia and weight
gain
z Weight gain can be significant and is generally well correlated with the total
daily dose of insulin
(vi) Disposal of needles:
z Used needles must be disposed of in a bio-safe manner. Used sharps should
be collected in a strong cardboard/ glass container, sealed and labelled and
handed over to the nearest healthcare facility
(vii) Initiation of insulin:
z For initiating insulin, it is not necessary to hospitalize the patient. It can be
done on outpatient basis
z The dose has to be individualized depending upon the blood glucose profile
and clinical setting
z It is better to start with small doses and modify as needed every three days
z Generally, the starting dose of insulin should be 0.2 units/kg/day
(viii) Adding insulin to oral antihyperglycaemic agents:
When combinations of oral antihyperglycaemic agents no longer maintain the level
of control desired, insulin is needed (see Section 7.1)
(ix) Multiple insulin injections:
z When a single insulin injection plus one or more oral agents no longer maintains
good glucose control, two or more injections are needed
z A regimen containing mixtures of NPH and regular insulin mixed in different
ratios (e.g. 25:75, 30:70, 50:50) either mixed by the individual or premixed,
taken before breakfast and dinner is a reasonable way to start multiple
injections
z Older persons need careful monitoring to avoid hypoglycaemia
7.3 Non-insulin injectable therapy (GLP-1 receptor agonists)
The incretin hormones glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and glucose dependent
insulinotropic peptide (GIP) are secreted from the gut in response to a meal and bring
about glucose-dependent insulin secretion from the beta cells of the pancreas and
suppression of glucagon release from the alpha cells. The GLP-1 receptor analogues
currently available are resistant to degradation by the DPP-4 enzyme and hence have
longer half-lives than native GLP-1. The main advantages of these agents are that
they reduce hyperglycaemia with minimal risk of hypoglycaemia and also promote
weight loss. The main side effects are nausea and vomiting; a few cases of acute
pancreatitis have also been reported. They can be combined with all other classes
of anti-hyperglycaemic agents except the DPP-4 inhibitors. There is some evidence
that these agents improve cardiovascular outcomes over and beyond their effects
on blood glucose. Exenatide, liraglutide, lixisenatide and dulaglutide are the GLP-1
receptor agonists available in India at present (Table 7.2). They can be taken at any
time of day, but preferably at the same time every day.
Table 7.2. GLP - 1 Receptor Agonists
Drug name Daily dosage Frequency
per day
Duration of
action (hrs)
Mode of excretion
Exenatide 5 - 20 mcg 2 10 Urine
Liraglutide 0.6 - 1.8 mg 1 24 Endogenous
metabolism without
major organ
excretion
Lixisenatide 10 - 20 mcg 1 24 Urine
Dulaglutide 0.75 - 1.5 mg Once per
week
24 - 72 Endogenous
metabolism,
degraded to smaller
proteins and amino
acids
SECTION 8 COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Most of the morbidity and mortality due to diabetes arises on account of its
complications. Diabetes complications can be broadly divided into acute and chronic
complications. Acute complications include hypo- and hyperglycaemic emergencies
whereas chronic complications include microvascular disease (retinopathy,
nephropathy and neuropathy), macrovascular disease (coronary artery disease,
cerebrovascular disease and peripheral vascular disease) and diabetic foot.
8.1 Acute Complications
8.1.1 Hypoglycaemia:
It is a common side effect due to drug therapy of diabetes especially sulphonylureas
and insulin. The patient may have classical symptoms like hunger, sweating, tremors,
palpitation with or without loss of consciousness.
Steps to be taken:
z If glucose monitor is available, random plasma glucose should be estimated
z If glucose monitor is not available and patient is conscious, he should be
treated with oral glucose/ sweets/sugar
z If patient is brought in unconscious state, give 25-50 ml of 25% dextrose IV
z If there is inadequate response, maintain a 5% dextrose drip and refer to
hospital immediately
z If recurrent hypoglycaemia persists, check for renal function and hypothyroidism
8.1.2 Hyperglycaemic emergencies (Diabetic Ketoacidosis- DKA or
Hyperosmolar Hyperglycaemic State- HHS):
Usually such emergencies occur in situations like infections or other stressful
conditions. There is usual history of missed dose of insulin or poor control of diabetes.
DKA is characterized by abdominal pain and is manifested with breathlessness,
vomiting, altered sensorium and dehydration. The symptoms of HHS are predominantly
neurological; dehydration is usually more profound but abdominal pain is uncommon.
Steps to be taken:
z Monitor glucose levels
z Check for urine ketones
z Intravenous saline infusion at 1 litre in half hour should be started immediately
and refer to hospital
8.2 Chronic Complications
Diabetes mellitus is a systemic disorder, which potentially can cause serious organ
damage involving eyes, heart, kidney, nerves and limbs, which ultimately can lead to
blindness, heart attack, kidney failure and limb amputation respectively. If diagnosed
early and treated in time appropriately, the damage to some of these organs can be
largely prevented or reversed. Another important issue is that most complications
cause clinical symptoms only at a very late stage and thus for their early diagnosis,
these complications have to be specifically looked for even at the time of prediabetes.
Considering this, the following approach is advisable for management of people with
type 2 diabetes.
On the first clinic visit detailed history and a thorough examination with preliminary
tests are essential. Additional investigations may be necessary if there are high
risk factors in the patient and/or there is any abnormality in history, examination
and preliminary investigations. At that stage, these patients need to be referred to
specialists for further management.
8.2.1 History:
8.2.1.1 Present history:
z Has the patient any specific symptoms related to organ involvement that
have brought him/her to the doctor?
z Duration of diabetes
z Medications and doses
z Compliance with medication and life style measures
z Latest blood glucose, HbA1C and other lab reports available
z Referral to retinal specialist is mandatory if one is unable to do a retinal exam
8.2.1.2 Past history:
z Hypertension
z Heart disease
z Known kidney disease
z Tuberculosis
z Eye problem including history of laser treatment / therapy
z Surgery, past history of non-healing ulcer and / or amputation
8.2.1.3 Personal history:
z Smoking and tobacco use
z Alcohol intake
z Dietary habits
z Exercise regimen
8.2.1.4 Family history:
z Diabetes and diabetic complications
z Hypertension
z Kidney diseases
z Stroke
z Coronary artery disease
8.2.2 Examination:
z Blood pressure (sitting and standing)
z CVS examination-heart sounds, murmurs
z Other systemic examinations - respiratory, neurology, abdomen,
musculoskeletal etc.
z Peripheral pulses/carotid pulses
z Pedal edema
z Complete foot examination (ref page 45)
8.2.2.1 Eye examination:
z Visual acuity
z Intra Ocular Pressure (if possible)
z Retinal examination including fundus examination after dilatation
(ophthalmoscopy)
z Cataract
8.2.3 Investigations:
z These are detailed under each complication
z In selected cases, X-ray chest may also be indicated
8.3 Coronary Artery Disease
z When patient is asymptomatic with abnormal E.C.G, refer to specialist /
physician / cardiologist
z If the symptoms suggest suspicion of unstable angina / acute myocardial
infarction (MI), give aspirin (300 mg to be chewed) and statin (e.g. Atorvastatin
80 mg) and refer to nearest hospital urgently
8.4 Diabetic Nephropathy
8.4.1 Investigations:
z Urine microscopy (Casts and pus cells, RBC)
z Blood Urea, Serum creatinine
z Calculate eGFR
z Microalbuminuria
z USG abdomen (if feasible)
z Serum sodium and potassium
8.4.2 Management of albuminuria /proteinuria:
The algorithm given in the next page outlines the steps in investigation of
albuminuria / proteinuria in a person with diabetes.
8.4.3 Treatment of hypertension in nephropathy:
z Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or Angiotensin II receptor
blockers (ARB) are the drugs of choice (never combine both)
z Others, if ACEIs or ARBs are not tolerated
z Calcium channel blockers
z Diuretics
z Selective beta blockers (should be given in case of known previous acute
coronary syndrome)
8.4.4 Refer the patient to nephrologist if:
z Patient has severe/resistant hypertension
z Patient has serum potassium > 5.5 meq/L
z Patient has nephrotic range proteinuria
z Proteinuria is present in absence of retinopathy
z Serum creatinine is > 1.5 mg%
z Any patient with pregestational diabetes or GDM with proteinuria
z eGFR as calculated by MDRD is < 60 ml/min
z Presence of fluid overload or oliguria
Figure. 8.1 shows a suggested algorithm for the evaluation of proteinuria in a patient
with diabetes. This will help differentiate proteinuria of diabetic and non-diabetic
etiology.
Figure 8.1: Algorithm for evaluation of non-diabetic proteinuria
8.5 Diabetic Retinopathy
Ninety percent of blindness from diabetic retinopathy (DR) is preventable by early
diagnosis and treatment. All physicians dealing with diabetic retinopathy patients in
large numbers must make an effort at recording visual acuity as an integral part of
their work up and must strive to develop the skill of direct ophthalmoscopy. If visual
acuity recording and retinal examination is not possible, all physicians must spend
time educating their diabetic patients on the strong potential for diabetes to cause
blindness, about how this can be prevented by regular visit to a retina specialist
and about the need for an immediate baseline eye examination and blood glucose
control. Recording of visual acuity and examination of the retina by ophthalmoscopy
is mandatory in all diabetic patients. Whenever possible retinal photography must be
obtained. If the services of a retina specialist are available, his / her opinion should
be sought about the stage of retinopathy, any need for immediate / early treatment
and about the next follow up visit. If services of a retina specialist are not available,
then it is advised to compare retinal examination findings and/or findings on retinal
photography with representative diabetic retinopathy images and corresponding
management/ follow up guidelines or refer to the grades of diabetic retinopathy chart
and advise patients accordingly.
z Those patients who have a long history of diabetes, poor glycemic control,
concurrent hypertension and nephropathy are more likely to have diabetic
retinopathy
z Pregnant women with diabetes also need frequent retinal examination as
pregnancy may accelerate the development and progression of retinopathy
z Visual acuity may be normal despite having diabetic retinopathy
z However, when the visual acuity is found to be decreased in any patient
with diabetes mellitus, it must be considered to be due to vision threatening
diabetic retinopathy and the patient must be referred immediately to a retina
specialist
8.5.1 Risk factors:
z Long duration of diabetes
z Poor glycemic control
z Uncontrolled hypertension
z Presence of diabetic nephropathy
8.5.2 General considerations:
z Inform all patients that sight threatening eye disease is a common complication
of diabetes
z Severe diabetic retinopathy can be present even with good vision
z Glasses testing/refraction should not be mistaken for retinal examination
z Physicians should impress that it is mandatory to undergo a dilated retinal
examination preferably by a trained retina specialist
z Vision testing and (if possible) intraocular pressure testing should be done
before retinal examination in all patients
z Person with impaired vision (< 6/60) should undergo low vision evaluation and
rehabilitation
z Person with diabetes should be screened for other causes of visual loss like
cataract, glaucoma and macular degeneration
8.5.3 Screening recommendation for retinal examination *:
Patient Group When to screen first Routine follow-up
Type 1 diabetes Within 5 years of diagnosis Annually thereafter
Type 2 diabetes At time of diagnosis Annually thereafter
Pregnancy in pre-existing diabetes, retinal examination prior to conception and
during pregnancy, refer to the ophthalmologist / retina specialist early in the first
trimester
* Based on the findings during the fundus examination, subsequent follow up advice is provided.
8.6 Diabetic Neuropathy
8.6.1 Diagnosis & clinical recognition:
z Sensory neuropathy is evidenced by symptoms of paresthesiae (such as
tingling, numbness and pain) or loss of sensation of touch, pain, temperature
and vibration
z Neuropathy can lead to foot deformities and dryness of plantar skin leading
to neuropathic foot ulcers. These ulcers are susceptible for infection, cellulitis
and osteomyelitis often requiring partial foot amputation
z Motor weakness of small muscles of foot is evidenced by inability to grip
footwear and alteration of arch of foot, bringing pressure on the head of first
metatarsal and heel
z Quadriceps wasting and absent knee jerk and bilateral hip muscle weakness
suggest diabetic amyotrophy
z Cranial motor neuropathy involving 3 rd, 6 th and rarely 7 th nerve must be
considered in relevant cases
z Radiculopathy and cranial neuropathies are reversible while sensorimotor
symmetrical polyneuropathy is progressive and irreversible
z Assess for autonomic neuropathy with symptoms such as orthostatic
hypotension, gastroparesis, diarrhoea /constipation, impotence, cystopathy
and gustatory sweating
z Always exclude other causes of neuropathy for example nutritional deficiency,
hypothyroidism, spinal disorders, paraneoplastic syndrome, drug induced,
alcohol abuse, uremic neuropathies, etc.
8.6.2 Clinical examination:
z For sensation as described under foot examination
z Motor power assessment and tendon jerks
z Examination of BP in sitting and standing positions and ECG for heart rate
variability may be useful in diagnosing autonomic neuropathy
8.6.3 Investigations:
z TSH
z Vitamin B12 assay (if possible)
z Paraproteinemias (if possible)
Refer atypical cases to a neurologist for further investigations like nerve conduction
studies etc.
8.6.4 Treatment:
z Tight glycemic control is essential. If there is painful peripheral neuropathy,
drugs such as antiepileptics (gabapentin, pregabalin), tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs) (amitryptiline, imipramine), and serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake
inhibitors (SNRIs), (venlafaxine, duloxetine) are the first line medications.
Either the maximum dose of each drug or a combination of two drugs must be
tried to give relief. In resistant painful neuropathies use of second line drugs
like opioids (tramadol) is also advised
z If patient has symptoms and signs of numbness and loss of sensation, follow
the guideline given under foot care to protect the foot from ulceration
z Sexual dysfunction in males should be referred to specialists for appropriate
therapy
8.7 Diabetic Foot
8.7.1 Diabetic foot screening:
This aims at categorizing feet into Low risk, At Risk or Active Foot Disease.
Examination of a patient should include:
8.7.1.1. Foot inspection:
z Inspection of skin, nails and for structural foot deformity
z Examination of footwear
z Record presence of:
• toe deformities like claw toes, hammer toe
• bunion
• high arch foot (pes cavus)
• Charcot foot
8.7.1.2. 10g monofilament sensation:
It delivers a 10 gram force when applied so as to make it buckle.
z Apply the monofilament perpendicular to the skin’s surface (see Figure 8.2.A
below)
z Apply sufficient force to cause the filament to bend or buckle (see Figure
8.2.B below)
z The total duration of the approach, skin contact, and departure of the filament
should be approximately 1- 2 seconds
z Apply the filament along the perimeter and NOT ON an ulcer site, callus, scar
or necrotic tissue. Do not allow the filament to slide across the skin or make
repetitive contact at the test site
z A person who cannot feel the 10 gram filament at the selected sites
(Figure 8.2.C) is at increased risk for developing ulcers
Figure 8.2. The monofilament test
Figure 8.2.A Figure 8.2.B Figure 8.2.C

8.7.1.3. Vibration perception (128 Hz tuning fork):
Place the stem of the fork over the bony prominences of the foot (big toe and
medial malleolus) and ask the patient if he feels the vibration. Record the result as
absent, reduced or present depending on the patient’s response. If absent, check at
more proximal sites such as tibial tuberosity and anterior superior iliac spine.
8.7.1.4. Biothesiometer test:
The vibration perception threshold (VPT) is examined using a biothesiometer with
the patient in the supine position with or without eyes closed.
8.7.1.5. Vascular assessment:
This involves the manual palpation of the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses
in both feet. Ankle brachial pressure index (ABI) using hand held Doppler should
be assessed if peripheral pulsations are absent or clinical suspicion of peripheral
ischaemia (Normal ABI is between 0.9 to 1.3).
8.7.2. Risk categorization:
Risk categorization method for basic foot screening involves history of diabetesrelated foot complications, medical history, and assessment of peripheral sensation,
arterial supply and presence of foot deformity (Table 8.1)
Table 8.1 Risk categories in diabetic foot
Risk Category Clinical Features Frequency of
assessment Examiner
Low risk Normal foot pulses,
normal vibration and
sensation to 10g
monofilament, no history
of foot ulceration, no
significant foot deformity,
no visual impairment.
Annual Foot healthcare
provider
Moderate risk Reduction in vibration and
monofilament sensation
and/or absence of pedal
pulses
Annual
or more
frequently as
required
GP/foot health
care provider,
podiatrist and
physiotherapist
High risk Claudication / rest pain
History of ulceration /
Charcot neuroarthropathy
Every 6
months
or more
frequently as
required
GP/ foot health
care provider,
podiatrist and
physiotherapist
Active foot
disease
Ulceration, infection,
suspicion of Charcot foot
or ischaemia
At least
once weekly
or more
frequently as
required
Diabetes
multidisciplinary
footcare service
(Note: those with previous history of foot ulcer, amputation or PVD need foot examination at every clinic visit or at
least every 3 months)
8.7.3. General Principles of Management:
z There is no need for a patient with low risk of diabetic foot disease to routinely
see a podiatrist / physiotherapist for diabetes related purposes
z All patients with diabetes should receive foot care education (See Do’s and
Don’ts - Table 8.2)
z Risk factors like tobacco use should be controlled in every case
z Patients with foot deformity that interferes with the function of the foot or
the ability to obtain appropriate footwear should be referred for specialist
assessment
z Similarly, patients with absent pedal pulses should be referred for vascular
assessment
z If ulceration is present then refer within 24 hours to multidisciplinary foot care
service
z If there are clinical signs of infection, antibiotics should be commenced
immediately. If there are clinical signs of severe/limb threatening infection,
the patient should be admitted urgently for intravenous antibiotic therapy and
surgical debridement or referred to appropriate higher centres
8.7.4. Foot care education:
All patients with diabetes should be educated on the do’s and don’ts of foot care
as listed in the Table 8.2.
Table 8.2: Foot care — Do’s and Don’ts for patients
Do Do not
Inspect feet daily using mirror Walk barefoot
Wash feet daily in lukewarm water, also
in between toes Smoke/Consume excess alcohol
Apply moisturizing lotion to feet after
drying Expose to extreme temperature
Have your feet checked at each clinic
visit Use hot fomentation
Inspect footwear daily for defects/
foreign bodies
Use chemicals agents (e.g. corn
plaster), corn caps or blades to treat
corns or calluses
Change footwear regularly Wear new footwear for more than
few hours everyday
Buy footwear preferably in the evening Neglect any minor foot lesions

SECTION 9 DIABETES AND PREGNANCY
9.1. Pre-gestational diabetes
Women with pre-existing diabetes, (e.g. type 2 or type 1 diabetes) who become
pregnant are said to have pre-gestational diabetes. Maternal and fetal outcomes are
good if the pregnancy is planned, preconception checkup done and tight glycemic
control is achieved. The steps to achieve these are:
z Tight glycemic control (preferably HbA1C (< 6.5%) is ideal before a planned
pregnancy
z Folic acid supplementation should be given
z Antihypertensive agents should be changed to calcium channel blockers or
alpha methyldopa
z ACEIs, ARBs, Diuretics and Statins should be discontinued
z Pre-pregnancy baseline evaluation of eyes and kidney function must be done
z Optimisation of nutritional status, anaemia and pre-pregnancy weight should
be done
z Maternal and fetal surveillance during pregnancy should ideally be done by an
obstetrician and physician
9.2 Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM)
Glucose intolerance of any severity detected for the first time during pregnancy is
termed as gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
9.2.1 Screening for gestational diabetes:
9.2.1a Indications:
Ideally all pregnant women in India should be screened for GDM i.e. universal
screening. In case this is not possible, and only selective screening is done, at least
the following women should be screened:
z History of GDM
z First degree relative with diabetes
z Pre-pregnancy obesity (BMI > 25 kg/m2)
z History of large weight babies (>3.5kgs)
z Bad obstetric history; - stillbirth, congenital anomalies, recurrent pregnancy
loss, eclampsia, hydramnios
z Repeated or persistent urinary tract infection
z Glycosuria during pregnancy
z Age above 25 years
However, if all these criteria are employed there will be very few women who are
at low risk and do not need screening for GDM. Hence, it is better to try to screen all
pregnant women for GDM.
9.2.1b Screening methods for GDM:
Screening for diabetes is ideally done at the first antenatal visit. Screening at
the first trimester is mainly to rule out pre-existing diabetes. For this, fasting blood
glucose or random blood glucose or HbA1C should be done. If the fasting glucose
is ≥ 126 mg/dl or the random glucose is ≥200 mg/dl or HbA1C is ≥6.5%, it indicates
pre-existing diabetes. A fasting plasma glucose between 92-125 mgs/dl at the first
trimester screening is considered as GDM according to International Association of
Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups (IADPSG) criteria. At the second trimester,
screening for GDM is done usually between 24 and 28 weeks of gestation. An Oral
Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) should be done using 75 gm glucose load using
the IADPSG criteria (endorsed by WHO 2013 & FIGO 2016). The following are the
IADPSG glucose cut-offs for GDM:
Fasting Plasma Glucose (mg/dl) ≥ 92
1 hour (mg/dl) ≥ 180
2 hour (mg/dl) ≥ 153
If any one of the values is above these cut-offs, the woman is diagnosed to have
GDM.
In situations where pregnant women cannot come in a fasting state and in resource
limited settings, the Diabetes in Pregnancy Study Groups of India (DIPSI) guidelines
of non-fasting 75 gms single 2 Hr post glucose value ≥ 140 mg/dl can be used.
9.3. Management of hyperglycaemia in pregnancy
Exercise and medical nutritional therapy is the first step and initiated in all women
with GDM. When this fails to achieve the target, medical management is initiated.
Insulin is the preferred drug of choice in diabetes and pregnancy. Currently most
types of insulin are approved for use in pregnancy except Glargine, Glulisine and
Degludec.
After the Metformin in GDM (MIG) study, many centres have started using metformin
as first line in GDM. However more data are needed in Indians.
Besides glycemic control, fetal growth and maternal blood pressure need to be
monitored.
9.3.1 Goals for therapy:
Fasting Plasma Glucose (mg/dl) <90
1 hour Postprandial Glucose (mg/dl) <140
2 hour Postprandial Glucose (mg/dl) <120
9.4 Post-partum follow up
As 50-70% of women with GDM go on to develop diabetes within 5-10 years after
delivery, post partum screening for diabetes is necessary. A 2 hr OGTT using 75g
glucose should be done 6-8 weeks after delivery for reclassification of diabetes as
normal, pre-diabetes or diabetes. If normal, the testing should be repeated annually.
SECTION 10 COMORBID CONDITIONS
10.1 Hypertension
Hypertension in patient with diabetes more than doubles the risk of morbidity and
mortality from strokes and heart attacks. It is also one of the important correctable
factors for reducing the risk of diabetic nephropathy. Hence it is essential that blood
pressure should be checked on every visit and kept under control. A blood pressure
(BP) more than 140/90 mm is the trigger to initiate treatment. Initial attempt should
be made to control the BP by non-pharmacological measures. These include weight
reduction, dietary modification by reducing salt intake and stress management (if
possible).
A person with diabetes as well as with hypertension should be treated more
aggressively than an individual with hypertension but without diabetes.
10.1.1 Blood pressure management and targets:
If blood pressure is >140/90mm Hg
Recheck after 1 week
If still high, drug therapy needs to be initiated with a single drug
1. ACE inhibitors /ARB (do not combine both) (or)
2. Calcium channel blockers
3. Selective beta blockers or diuretics (as a third line option if
indicated)
If the blood pressure remains >140/90 mm Hg after 1 month of monotherapy, add
a second drug from a different class (do not combine ACEI and ARB). If BP is not
controlled even with optimal doses of two agents, referral to a specialist is indicated.
In patients with diabetic renal disease, even lower BP targets are recommended.
10.1.2 Severe hypertension:
If at initial visit, blood pressure is > 180/110 mm Hg, or the patient has evidence
of end organ damage, treatment should be initiated with two drugs initially and patient
should be referred to a specialist as early as possible.
10.2. Dyslipidaemia
All patients with diabetes should be screened for dyslipidaemia and if present
should be treated aggressively
10.3. Obesity
Weight reduction should be attempted in obese individuals with obesity. Lifestyle
modification is the main stay of treatment and judiciously drugs may be used as an
adjuvant. In morbid obesity, bariatric surgery may be an option.
10.4 Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the major public health problems in India. The
prevalence of diabetes is high among people with TB in India and about 25% of TB
patients were found to have diabetes and 24%, pre-diabetes. Diabetes is believed
to elevate the risk of contracting TB by 2.5 to 3-fold. There should be a high index
of suspicion for TB in all patients with diabetes. Wherever clinically indicated, initial
evaluation of a patient with diabetes should include a chest X-ray.
Reducing morbidity and mortality due to TB and DM can be achieved through
integrated approach of prevention, bidirectional screening for early detection in routine
health care setting and management strategies through integration of services for TB
and diabetes. Insulin is preferred if diabetes is uncontrolled or the TB is extensive.
SUMMARY OF GUIDELINES
1. Screening and Diagnosis
1.1 All individuals aged 30 years and above should be screened for diabetes.
Screening should be carried out at an earlier age in those with additional risk
factors.
1.2 The oral glucose tolerance test is the diagnostic test of choice. Other options
include fasting plasma glucose, random plasma glucose (in the presence of
symptoms) and glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c).
1.3 The diagnosis of diabetes should be confirmed by a repeat test on a different
day (unless there is unequivocal hyperglycemia).
2. Management of Hyperglycemia
2.1 Education regarding the disease and its management should be provided to all
patients.
2.2 Lifestyle modification, including information on healthy dietary practices and
sufficient physical activity, should be the first line of management.
2.3 Metformin is the initial pharamacotherapy of choice for most patients (unless
specific contraindications or tolerance issues exist, or the patient has
symptomatic hyperglycemia).
2.4 Sulphonylureas, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors and sodium glucose
cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors are the preferred second line oral agents.
Other alternatives include thiazolidinediones, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors,
glinides and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists.
2.5 Consider triple oral therapy or initiation of insulin in patients not at target with
dual therapy.
2.6 Most patients with type 2 diabetes should aim to keep their HbA1c below 7%.
However, treatment targets need to be individualized.
3. Management of Complications and Comorbidities
3.1 Comprehensive risk factor control should be attempted, aiming at achieving
optimal levels of blood pressure and lipids, smoking cessation and weight
reduction in addition to glycemic control.
3.2 Dilated retinal examination should be performed by a trained ophthalmologist at
the time of first diagnosis of diabetes and at least annually thereafter.
3.3 Kidney function should be assessed at the time of diagnosis and at least annually
thereafter by means of urine albumin-creatinine ratio and serum creatinine levels
with calculation of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR).
3.4 A comprehensive foot examination should be carried out at the time of first
diagnosis and at least annually thereafter, focusing on detection of peripheral
neuropathy and peripheral arterial disease.
4. Diabetes in pregnancy
4.1 All pregnant women should be screened for diabetes at the first antenatal visit.
4.2 Screening is ideally performed by means of an OGTT, utilizing thresholds
suggested by the International Association of Diabetes in Pregnancy Study
Groups (IADPSG). Alternatively, the Diabetes in Pregnancy Study Group India
(DIPSI) criteria can be used if the woman is unable to come in the fasting state.
4.3 While lifestyle modification is the initial management option for women with
gestational diabetes, most patients will need insulin. Oral antihyperglycemic
agents are best avoided.
4.4 All women with gestational diabetes should undergo an OGTT 6 weeks after
delivery to reclassify their glycemic status
5. Prevention of Diabetes
5.1 Prevention of diabetes can be carried out at primordial, primary, secondary and
tertiary levels.
5.2 Individuals with pre-diabetes should receive education on intensive lifestyle
modification so as to delay or prevent their progression to diabetes.
Workshop on
“ICMR Guidelines for Management of Type 2 Diabetes 2018”
January 10, 2018, Chennai
CONVENORS
Dr. Nikhil Tandon,
Professor & Head,
Department of Endocrinology,
All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Ansari Nagar,
New Delhi
Dr. V. Mohan,
Director,
Madras Diabetes Research Foundation &
Dr. Mohan’s Diabetes Specialties Centre,
4, Conran Smith Road, Gopalapuram
Chennai
CO-ORDINATORS
Dr. Tanvir Kaur,
Deputy Director General (Sr Grade)/Scientist-F
Division of Non-communicable Diseases,
Indian Council of Medical Research,
Department of Health Research,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi
Dr.R.S. Dhaliwal,
Scientist G
Head, Noncommunicable
Diseases(NCD)
Indian Council of Medical Research,
Ansari Nagar,
New Delhi
EXPERT GROUP
Dr. SK Aggarwal Dr. R. Madhavan Dr. Rekha Sharma
Dr. Anand Moses Dr. Manoj Chadha Dr. Sanjeeb Kataki
Dr. Anant Nigam Dr. V. Mohan Dr. Shashank R. Joshi
Dr.R.M.Anjana Dr. Nikhil Tandon Dr. A. Shanmugam
Dr.S.R.Aravind Dr. Nihal Thomas Dr. Sharad Pendsey
Dr. Ashok Kumar Das Dr. I. Periyandavar Dr. Sidhartha Das
Dr. Banshi Saboo Dr. Prasanna Kumar Dr. Sudha Vidyasagar
Dr.P.Dharmarajan Dr. Pradeep Venkatesh Ms.Sudha Vasudevan
Dr. Eesh Bhatia Dr. Prem Pais Dr.Subhankar Chowdhury
Dr.R. Guha Pradeepa Dr.R. Rajalakshmi Dr. Tanvir Kaur
Dr. Jothydev Kesavadev Dr.Ranjit Unnikrishnan Dr. Uma Ram
Dr. S.V. Madhu Dr. P.V. Rao Dr. Vijay Viswanathan
WORKING GROUPS
I. Working Group on Introduction, Diagnostic Criteria & Screening,
Pregnancy, Comorbid conditions and Tuberculosis
Team:
1. Dr.V. Mohan
2. Dr. Shashank R. Joshi
3. Dr. Sidhartha Das
4. Dr. P.V.Rao
5. Dr. Anand Moses
6. Dr. Uma Ram
7. Dr. S.V.Madhu
8. Dr. R.Madhavan
9. Dr. A. Shanmugam
Rapporteurs :
1. Dr.K.Gokulakrishnan
2. Dr.S.Kanthimathi
II. Working Group on Targets and Monitoring and Pharmacological
Management (Insulin)
Team:
1. Dr. Nihal Thomas
2. Dr. S.R.Aravind
3. Dr. Jothydev Kesavadev
4. Dr. P. Dharmarajan
5. Dr. R.M.Anjana
Rapporteur :
1. Dr.D.Bodhini
III. Working Group on Non Pharmacological Management
Team:
1. Dr.Sudha Vidyasagar
2. Ms.Sudha Vasudevan
3. Dr.Tanvir Kaur
4. Dr.Rekha Sharma

Rapporteur :
1. Dr.Ranjani Harish
IV. Working Group on Pharmacological Management (OHA)
Team:
1. Dr. Nikhil Tandon
2. Dr.Anant Nigam
3. Dr.Subhankar Chowdhury
4. Dr.Banshi Saboo
5. Dr.Ranjit Unnikrishnan

Rapporteur :
1. Dr.Deepa Mohan
V. Working Group on Complications
Team:
1. Dr.Ashok Kumar Das
2. Dr.Vijay Viswanathan
3. Dr. I. Periyandavar
4. Dr.R.Rajalakshmi
5. Dr.R.Guha Pradeepa
Rapporteur :
1. Dr.A.Amutha