IDF Global Clinical Practice
Recommendations for
Managing Type 2 Diabetes

IDF Global Clinical Practice
Recommendations for
Managing Type 2 Diabetes
In Memoriam
We are deeply saddened by the passing of Professor Akhtar Hussain (IDF President 2022-2024),
who served as Chair of this initiative and led its development. His leadership, dedication,
and expertise significantly shaped this publication. We respectfully dedicate this work to his memory.
Correspondence
Prof. Stephen Colagiuri (co-chair), University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. stephen.colagiuri@sydney.edu.au;
Prof. Antonio Ceriello (co-chair), IRCCS MultiMedica, Milan, Italy. antonio.ceriello@hotmail.it
Acknowledgements
International Centre for Professional Development in Health and Medicine (ICPDHM), Team – Canada
Bhavadharini Balaji, PhD - Lead medical writer,
Alanna Grant, PhD - Senior medical writer and editorial support,
Jenny Anawati, Vice President,
Anatoly Langer, MD, MSc, FRCPS(C), FACC, Chair,
Vivianne Vinet, Chief Executive Officer,
IDF Executive Office
Lorenzo Piemonte (Belgium)
Lucy Michaeloudis (France)
Paraskevi Salpea (United States)
Phil Riley (Belgium)
Sameer Pathan (United Kingdom)
Xango Bimont (France)
Sponsors’ duality of interest
This update of the 2005 International Diabetes Federation (IDF) Global Guideline on type 2 diabetes
was supported by educational grants from Sanofi and Servier.
These companies did not take part in any aspect of the development of these clinical practice
recommendations.

Copyright
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without the
written prior permission of the International Diabetes Federation. Requests to reproduce or translate
this publication should be e-mail at communications@idf.org.
© International Diabetes Federation, 2025
ISBN 978-2-930229-97-3
Please cite this report as International Diabetes Federation. IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations
for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025. https://idf.org/t2d-cpr-2025
Co-chairs:
Antonio Ceriello (Italy)
Contributors:
Tadej Battelino (Slovenia)
A Enrique Caballero (USA)
Juliana CN Chan (Hong Kong, China)
Francesco Cosentino (Sweden)
Amalia Gastadelli (Italy)
Per-Henrik Groop (Finland)
Akhtar Hussain (Norway) – in memoriam
David Jenkins (Canada)
Linong Ji (China)
Stephen Colagiuri (Australia)
IDF TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP
Nebojsa Lalic (Serbia)
Carolyn SP Lam (Singapore)
Rayaz A Malik (Qatar)
Roopa Mehta (Mexico)
Viswanathan Mohan (India)
Renan Magalhães Montenegro Junior (Brazil)
Ayesha A Motala (South Africa)
Peter E.H. Schwarz (Germany)
Luc Van Gaal (Belgium)
Antonio Pérez (Spain)
Gojka Roglic (Switzerland)
Banshi Saboo (India)
Petar M Seferović (Serbia)
Jonathan Shaw (Australia)
Wayne H-H Sheu (Taiwan, China)
Nigel Unwin (UK)
Daisuke Yabe (Japan)
Jian Zhou (China)
Project Development, Coordination, and Dissemination
Sameer Pathan, Senior Manager at the International Diabetes Federation, served as project lead
and coordinator for this publication, overseeing its development, expert engagement, finalisation,
and global dissemination.
External Reviewers:
Adel El Sayed (Egypt)
Mohammed Eslam (Australia)
Massimo Federici (Italy)
Edward W Gregg (UK)
James L Januzzi, Jr (USA)
Alicia Jenkins (Australia)
Anatoly Langer (Canada)
Maddalena Lettino (Italy)
Geltrude Mingrone (Italy)
Bernard Omech (Uganda)

Foreward

Introduction
Antonio Ceriello, MD & Stephen Colagiuri, MD
Chapter 1
Detection of diabetes and intermediate hyperglycaemia, and prevention
of type 2 diabetes
Chapter 2
Glycaemic control assessment and targets in type 2 diabetes
Chapter 3
Blood glucose-lowering therapies – non-insulin options for type 2 diabetes
Chapter 4
Blood glucose-lowering therapies – insulin options for type 2 diabetes
Chapter 5
Weight control in type 2 diabetes mellitus management
Chapter 6
Cardio-renal protection in type 2 diabetes
Chapter 7
Management of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
(MASLD) in type 2 diabetes
Pg. 13
Pg. 9
Pg. 18
Pg. 34
Pg. 50
Pg. 62
Pg. 74
Pg. 86
Pg. 100
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreward
IDF Global Clinical Practice
Recommendations for Managing
Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
FOREWARD
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
On behalf of the International Diabetes
Federation (IDF), it is my great pleasure to present
this 2025 edition of the IDF Global Clinical Practice
Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes.
These recommendations reflect our ongoing
commitment to improving the lives of people
living with diabetes worldwide by equipping
healthcare providers with the tools to help them
deliver high-quality, evidence-based care.
Diabetes remains a serious and fast-growing
public health challenge. The IDF Diabetes Atlas
estimated that 589 million adults aged 20–79
years were living with diabetes in 2024 and that
this number is projected to reach 853 million by
2050. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), which
accounts for between 90% and 95% of all diabetes
cases, places a substantial burden on individuals,
families, and healthcare systems. Around half of
all T2DM cases remain undiagnosed.
If not managed, T2DM can lead to severe
complications, including cardiovascular
disease, chronic kidney disease, retinopathy,
neuropathy, and liver disease. With an early
diagnosis and access to appropriate treatment
and support, T2DM can be controlled and its
associated complications prevented or delayed.
Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that
remission of T2DM may be possible in the
early stages of the condition. Therefore, early
detection, effective management, and preventive
strategies are imperative to address the burden
T2DM places on individuals and their families.
The 2025 IDF global clinical practice
recommendations have been updated to
incorporate the latest evidence and advancements
in diabetes care. These recommendations
provide a structured yet adaptable framework
for healthcare professionals, ensuring they are
equipped with practical guidance tailored to
diverse clinical settings. A key feature of these
recommendations is their unique approach to
distinguishing between optimal and basic care
strategies, allowing for context-specific adaptation
while maintaining high standards
of diabetes management.
This edition covers a broad range of critical
topics, including epidemiology, glycaemic
targets, blood glucose management (both
non-insulin and insulin therapies), weight
control, cardio-renal health, and the impact
FOREWARD
11Foreward
of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic
liver disease (MASLD) on diabetes outcomes.
These recommendations prioritise a personcentred approach, ensuring that care is aligned
with the individual needs, preferences, and
circumstances of people living with diabetes.
The development of these recommendations has
been a collaborative effort, bringing together
leading experts from around the world. I extend
my heartfelt gratitude to the co-chairs of the
Technical Working Group, Professor Stephen
Colagiuri and Professor Antonio Ceriello, and
to all the contributors, reviewers, and editors
who have dedicated their time and expertise
to this initiative. I acknowledge the essential
contribution of our past president, the late
Professor Akhtar Hussain, whose vision and
dedication were instrumental in shaping this
project from the outset. He would be extremely
proud that this document has been produced
and launched in time for our congress, in keeping
with his wishes. His contributions will remain a
legacy in the field of diabetes care and education.
Additionally, I extend my appreciation to the IDF
Executive Office for their unwavering support in
delivering this document.
The impact of these recommendations will be
determined by their implementation. We urge
healthcare providers, policymakers, and other
key diabetes stakeholders to adopt and adapt
these guidelines within their local contexts,
ensuring they lead to meaningful improvements
in diabetes care. By working together, we can
alleviate the global burden of diabetes, prevent
its complications, and move closer to achieving
universal health coverage and health equity for
all those living with or at risk of diabetes.
The International Diabetes Federation remains
steadfast in its goal to support healthcare
professionals, empower people living with
diabetes, and drive innovation in diabetes care.
We hope these recommendations will serve as a
valuable resource for all those working to improve
diabetes management in primary care settings.
Thank you for joining us in this vital effort.
Together, we can create a world where everyone
has access to the care they need to lead healthy,
fulfilling lives.
Professor Peter Schwarz
IDF President, 2024–2027

Introduction
Antonio Ceriello & Stephen Colagiuri
IDF Global Clinical Practice
Recommendations for Managing
Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
STANDARDS OF CARE
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
The principles of T2DM care are
as follows:
o An holistic approach to delivering
evidence-based care centred
around the person with diabetes,
empowered through selfmanagement education and support
o A well-trained multidisciplinary
health professional team
o Decision support systems (registries,
reminders, audits, and feedback)
Diabetes is a major global health challenge, with
an estimated 589 million adults in 2024 living
with diabetes, of whom almost one-in-two were
undiagnosed. In addition, another 1.1 billion
adults worldwide had impaired glucose tolerance
or impaired fasting glycaemia predisposing
them to an increased risk of developing type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM). These numbers are
projected to increase significantly over the next
two decades.1
T2DM is the most common type of diabetes,
accounting for over 90% of all diabetes
worldwide, and is associated with increased
all-cause mortality and macrovascular and
microvascular complications. There is strong
evidence that the T2DM burden can be reduced
by controlling hyperglycaemia and associated
risk factors, diagnosing earlier, and preventing
high-risk individuals from progressing to T2DM.
The global burden of T2DM continues to increase
despite the wealth of existing evidence on
diabetes care and prevention. Optimal diabetes
management is not reaching the majority of
individuals who could benefit. Poor glycaemic
control is common in T2DM and does not meet
the World Health Organization (WHO) goal of
80% of people with diagnosed diabetes
achieving good glycaemic control.2
INTEGRATED
DIABETES CARE
deliver care in the context of a chronic care
model which addresses the multifaceted
challenges inherent to this complex condition.
Structured diabetes care is an essential aspect of
integrated care and underscores the significance
of systematic and organised processes, including
assessment as a crucial component of quality
assurance. Regular evaluation of the person
with T2DM’s progress and adherence to agreed
care plans creates a foundation for data-driven
decision-making.
International Diabetes Federation
guidelines
The first International Diabetes Federation
(IDF) Global Guideline for Type 2 Diabetes was
published in 20053,4 and an update for primary
care physicians was published in 2017.5 Since
then, T2DM management has undergone
considerable transformation marked by
noteworthy developments. New medications
have emerged, offering a broader range of
therapeutic options and a more personalised
approach to care aligning interventions with
individual needs. Concurrently, tests for
assessing and monitoring diabetes have evolved.
The integration of technology into diabetes
care has transformed the interaction between
individuals with T2DM and their providers.
Wearable devices, continuous glucose
monitoring systems, and mobile applications
are available for the daily management of T2DM
in well-resourced healthcare systems. Coupled
with the adoption of virtual care, including
telemedicine and digital health platforms, these
technological advancements have expanded
access to care, fostering engagement and
facilitating ongoing monitoring and support.
The IDF Global Clinical Practice
Recommendations for Managing Type 2
Diabetes - 2025
IDF is a global umbrella organisation of more
than 240 national diabetes associations from
161 countries and territories, representing
a diverse range of health systems and
populations. Developing global clinical practice
recommendations which are relevant, applicable,
and equitable across these various healthcare
settings presents a unique challenge.
Clinical guidance recommendations of national
and international learned societies are
formulated on the highest level of available
evidence in relatively well-resourced health
STANDARDS OF CARE
Providing this care requires a comprehensive,
integrated, individual-centred strategy
supported by a health system structured to
15Introduction
systems with universal health coverage or at
least coverage of essential health services. This
does not reflect global reality, with an estimated
4.5 billion people not covered by essential health
services and exposed to out-of-pocket health
expenses and impoverishing financial hardship.
Regrettably, the recent global pattern is one
of stagnating progress in service coverage
with catastrophic health spending increasing
across all regions and most countries.6 In this
context, current clinical guidance may be of
limited practical use in countries with resourcechallenged health systems.
This new IDF Global Clinical Practice
Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes
- 2025 attempts to strike a balance, embracing
the latest therapeutic and technological evidence
while acknowledging the realities of providing
diabetes care in a diverse global healthcare
environment. These guidelines aspire to provide
healthcare professionals and policy makers
with an effective and contemporary framework
for navigating the complexities of diabetes
management that is sensitive to resource,
affordability, access, and equity.
Levels of diabetes care and prevention
approach
All people with or at risk of diabetes should
have equitable and affordable access to the
best available evidence-based, cost-effective
integrated diabetes care and prevention.
However, it is widely recognised that many
countries and health systems around the world
do not currently have the workforce or financial
resources to provide this level of diabetes care.
An imperative in formulating IDF guidance is
recognising the limitations and opportunities
presented in the context of varying healthcare
systems globally. This is pivotal in guiding
recommendations that cater to diverse settings,
and which can evolve and be adapted to
encourage and facilitate healthcare system reform.
The 2005 IDF guideline adopted a Levels of
Care approach to formulate recommendations
for diabetes care and prevention to address
the challenges of global variations in available
healthcare resources, expertise, and funding
across different countries and localities.3,4 Unlike
national guidelines formulated for a particular
healthcare system, this perspective is necessary
to increase the global relevance and applicability
of IDF recommendations.
To serve its global membership, the IDF has
developed this global guidance that is resource-,
capacity-, and cost-sensitive while ensuring an
appropriate level of care which will improve
outcomes relative to the current situation.
Standards of diabetes care and
prevention

IDF clinical and prevention recommendation
advice is now based on two levels of standards
of diabetes care and prevention which recognise
the diversity of global healthcare systems and
inherent resource constraints.
Optimal Care sets the standard for evidencebased care which would ideally be universally
available and represents the most desirable care
to achieve best outcomes. This care requires
well-resourced health systems which would
usually include some form of universal health
coverage. It may be available to subgroups of
the population in less well-resourced health
systems but is not generally available. It should
be the aim of all healthcare systems to achieve
this standard of care.
Basic Care aims to achieve the main objectives
of "Optimal Care" but is provided in a healthcare
setting with limited resources. It serves as a
foundational level or starting point to ensure
that, even with limited resources, individuals
receive essential care and establishes a pathway
towards Optimal Care.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
The intended users of these guidelines are
all healthcare professionals involved in the
management of people with T2DM (and those
at risk of developing T2DM) and policy makers
who are responsible for healthcare services to
improve individual and population health. The
focus on policy makers is particularly important
to ensure that healthcare and health system
reform is implemented to provide universal
optimal care.
Methodology
This guidance focuses on recent advances in
diabetes care and prevention. An IDF expert
panel was appointed to guide the development of
these recommendations, which were formulated
using an evidence-based consensus approach.
The process included proposing pertinent
questions deemed most relevant for the effective
management of individuals with, or at risk of,
T2DM. These questions were systematically
categorised into various topics. Experts in their
respective field compiled evidence summaries
for each section. The entire group convened to
discuss the synthesised evidence on the various
topics and draft recommendations. A preliminary
document was shared with external reviewers
for broader input. Feedback received was
carefully reviewed, and revisions made to address
duplications and consolidate the evidence and
recommendations. The International Centre
for Professional Development in Health and
Medicine (ICPDHM.com), a not-for-profit
physician organisation based in Canada, provided
medical writing, editorial, and logistical support
throughout the development.
Acknowledgements
The IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations
for Managing Type 2 Diabetes - 2025 was
supported by educational grants from Sanofi and
Servier. These companies did not take part in
any aspect of the development of these clinical
practice recommendations.
Medical writing support was provided by,
Bhavadharini Balaji, PhD and Alanna Grant,
PhD of the International Centre for Professional
Development in Health and Medicine (ICPDHM),
Quebec, Canada.
REFERENCES
1. International Diabetes Federation (IDF). IDF
Diabetes Atlas, 11th edition. Brussels, Belgium:
International Diabetes Federation, 2025.
Available from: http://www.diabetesatlas.org.
2. World Health Organization. First-ever global
coverage targets for diabetes adopted at
the 75th World Health Assembly. Available
from: https://www.who.int/news-room/
feature-stories/detail/first-ever-globalcoverage-targets-for-diabetes-adopted-atthe-75-th-world-health-assembly [Accessed
February 2025].
Optimal Care Basic Care
Definition Evidence-based care and prevention
provided in well-resourced settings
Evidence-based care and prevention
adapted for resource-constrained
settings. Serves as a starting point
towards Optimal Care
Target audience Healthcare professionals and policy
makers in well-resourced settings
Healthcare professionals and policy
makers in resource-constrained settings
Accessibility All individuals with or at risk of diabetesEssential care for all individuals
regardless of resource limitations
Scope • Comprehensive
• Individual-centred
• Multidisciplinary care
• Decision support systems
• Focus on essential services
and prioritised programmes
• Adapted to challenges of local
healthcare settings
• Individual-centred
• Best available multidisciplinary
care approach
Table 1. Standards of diabetes care and prevention
STANDARDS OF CARE
17Introduction
3. IDF Clinical Guidelines Task Force. Global
guideline for type 2 diabetese. Brussels:
International Diabetes Federation, 2005. IDF
Clinical Guidelines Task Force. Global guideline
for type 2 diabetes: Recommendations for
standard, comprehensive, and minimal care.
Diabet Med. 2006;23(6):579-93.
4. IDF Clinical Guidelines Task Force.
Global guideline for type 2 diabetes:
Recommendations for standard,
comprehensive, and minimal care. Diabet Med.
2006;23(6):579-93.
5. IDF Working Group. IDF clinical practice
recommendations for managing type 2
diabetes in primary care. Available from:
https://idf.org/media/uploads/2023/05/
attachments-63.pdf [Accessed May 2024].
6. World Health Organization. Tracking universal
health coverage: 2023 global monitory
report. Available from: https://www.who.int/
publications/i/item/9789240080379 [Accessed
February 2025].
Detection of Diabetes
and Intermediate
Hyperglycaemia, and
Prevention of Type 2 Diabetes
Chapter 1
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
Chapter 1
RECOMMENDATIONS
Optimal Care Basic Care
Criteria for
defining diabetes
and intermediate
hyperglycaemia
WHO criteria ADA criteria
Diabetes
Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL)
2 h plasma glucose* ≥11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) ≥11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)
HbA1c ≥6.5% (48 mmol/mol) ≥6.5% (48 mmol/mol)
Intermediate hyperglycaemia
Impaired fasting glucose (IFG)
Fasting plasma glucose 6.1–6.9 mmol/L
(110–125 mg/dL)
5.6–6.9 mmol/L
(100–125 mg/dL)
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)
2 h plasma glucose* 7.8–11.0 mmol/L
(140–199 mg/dL)
7.8–11.0 mmol/L
(140–199 mg/dL)
HbA1c – 5.7%–6.4%
(39–47 mmol/mol)
Options for
screening for
diabetes and
intermediate
hyperglycaemia
Target group: determine locally
Risk assessment:
• Risk scores – developed locally or adapted to local factors
• Risk factors – excessive weight, family history, gestational diabetes history, etc.
Biochemical testing options:
• FPG
• 2 h OGTT
• HbA1c
1 h PG during 75 g OGTT is an emerging option
Select the screening protocol based on available resources and capacity to intervene
(in those identified as high-risk) with a diabetes prevention programme
Diabetes
prevention
programmes
for high-risk
individuals
• Offer a locally developed or adapted
6–12-month structured lifestyle modification
diabetes prevention programme aiming for
5% weight loss if overweight/obese.
• Consider metformin as additional
intervention
• Provide regular reassessment of individuals
• Support the programme with data systems
• Regularly monitor and evaluate
the programme
Consider the feasibility of implementing
a community-based lifestyle modification
diabetes prevention programme
Diabetes
prevention
population
strategies
Implement population programmes to
encourage healthier eating, increased
physical activity, and healthy weight
Consider population programme to
encourage healthier eating, increased
physical activity, and healthy weight
*Following a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test.
ADA, American Diabetes Association; FPG, fasting plasma glucose; HbA1c, glycated haemoglobin; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance
test; WHO, World Health Organization.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
o Globally, there is a high number of people with diabetes, which is predicted to continue
to increase; almost one in two people living with diabetes are undiagnosed.
o Diabetes can be diagnosed by fasting plasma glucose, 2 h oral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT), and glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) with universally agreed diagnostic criteria.
However, there is a lack of congruence between these measures.
o Screening for undiagnosed diabetes will identify individuals who will benefit from
early treatment.
o Intermediate hyperglycaemia (IH) (also referred to as “prediabetes”) includes impaired
glucose tolerance (IGT), impaired fasting glucose (IFG), and intermediate HbA1c. The WHO
and ADA criteria for defining IH differ for IFG and WHO does not have an HbA1c criterion.
o The prevalence of IH is higher than diabetes but varies with the screening test – these
tests lack congruence. IGT can only currently be detected by a 2 h OGTT.
o The 1 h OGTT test has recently been advocated as another option.
o Screening for IH identifies individuals who can benefit from interventions to prevent
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
o Strategies for diabetes prevention include the individual-based high-risk approach and
the population approach.
o Structured lifestyle modification programmes are effective in preventing or delaying
T2DM in people with IGT but not isolated IFG. Data for HbA1c-detected IH are limited.
Some medications can prevent or delay T2DM.
o Prevention strategies have been successfully translated in community or national
programmes in a number of countries.
o The design of programmes has differed in relation to target group, screening process
and test, and intensity and method of delivery of the lifestyle intervention. Little data
are available on the impact on diabetes prevention, but weight reduction and increased
physical activity are encouraging.
o A decision to implement a high-risk individual diabetes prevention programme should
be guided by local resources, health system capacity, and cost. Local design and
adaptation are important.
o Population approaches aiming to reduce modifiable diabetes risk factors in the whole
population include healthier eating, regular physical activity, and preventing and
managing overweight and obesity.
o Encouragingly, there appears to be a stabilisation or decline in diabetes incidence in
many higher-income countries.
KEY POINTS
Chapter 1
BACKGROUND
In 2024, an estimated 589 million adults aged 20
to 79 were living with diabetes, giving a prevalence
of 11.1%. Almost one-in-two (42.8%; 251.7million)
adults with diabetes were undiagnosed, with
considerable regional differences.1
In addition, the global prevalence of impaired
glucose tolerance (IGT) was 12.0% and
that of impaired fasting glucose (IFG) was
9.2%.1 Individuals with undiagnosed type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and intermediate
hyperglycaemia (IH) are at increased risk of
adverse outcomes and premature mortality.
Type 2 diabetes is a silent, progressive disease
with chronic hyperglycaemia often preceded
by IH. Earlier detection of T2DM provides an
opportunity to intervene with evidence-based
care and studies over the last three decades
confirm that progression from IH to T2DM
can be prevented or delayed. Tests used for
the early detection of diabetes and IH include
fasting plasma glucose (FPG), 2 h PG during
a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), or
glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c). Programmes
for the detection of undiagnosed T2DM and
the prevention of progression to T2DM in highrisk individuals are well-accepted strategies to
reduce the burden of diabetes.
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
The capacity to detect individuals with
undiagnosed T2DM and IH and implement
diabetes prevention programmes varies
considerably between countries and health
services and systems, especially in low- and
middle-income countries (LMIC). The World
Health Organization (WHO) periodically
conducts a country capacity survey on noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) to assess the
national-level response to the NCD burden,
which includes information on health system
capacity for diabetes detection, treatment, and
care. The most recent survey in 2019 collected
data from 160 countries; 75% reported having
an operational policy, strategy, or action plan
for diabetes. Specific details on diabetes
screening and prevention were not reported.
The percent of countries with guidelines utilised
in at least 50% of healthcare facilities was 22%
for overweight/obesity and 33% for physical
activity. Fifty-two percent of countries had an
OGTT generally available in 50% of their primary
care facilities in the public and private health
sector; 53% of countries had HbA1c tests.2 The
Pan American Health Organization separately
reported its survey results and found that
33 of 35 countries (94%) had blood glucose
measurement equipment, 22 of 35 countries
(63%) had OGTT testing, and 18 of 35 countries
(51%) had HbA1c testing generally available in
50% of public primary healthcare facilities.3 A
survey of individuals from LMICs showed that
the reach of any diabetes prevention-related
activities was low: 40% for physical activity
counselling, 37% for weight loss counselling,
43% for dietary counselling, and 37% for blood
glucose screening. The lowest receipt of these
activities was among people in low-income
countries and people with no formal education.4
EVIDENCE SUMMARY
Criteria for diabetes and intermediate
hyperglycaemia
Criteria for diabetes and IH have evolved since
the first WHO guidelines were published in
1965, with significant changes made by expert
panels of WHO and the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) to reflect evolving evidence
and its interpretation.5 Since there is no
specific marker which unequivocally defines
diabetes, the diagnosis is based on cut-points
derived from the relationship between various
measures of glycaemia associated with risk
of diabetes microvascular complications,
particularly retinopathy.5 Without a true gold
standard among the biochemical tests for
diagnosing diabetes (FPG, 2 h OGTT PG, HbA1c),
comparisons of these tests are questionable.
It has been suggested that the closest to a
gold standard would be a combination of
FPG, 2 h PG, and HbA1c assessments with
confirmatory testing for all parameters, but this
is not feasible.6 This also applies to tests and
comparisons of tests for IH.
There are significant differences in the attributes
of tests used to diagnose diabetes and IH which
influence the testing method adopted in different
health settings and services.7,8 These include
requirement for fasting, global access and
affordability, analytic stability, biologic variation,
and factors affecting the assay (Table 1.1).
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
FPG OGTT HbA1c
Fasting required Yes Yes No
Test preparation Fasting Pretest CHO intake Nil
Convenience Reasonable Low Good
Global access and
affordability
Highest Intermediate Intermediate
Pre-analytic stability Poor – influenced by sample handling Good
Assay standardisation Not standardised Standardised but
varies globally
Biological variation Intermediate High Low
Within-person variation High Low
Acute factors
affecting result
Food intake, stress, activity Not affected
Other factors
affecting results
Diurnal variation
Older age
Medications
Haemoglobinopathies
Altered red cell turnover,
uraemia
Ethnicity
Diagnostic sensitivity
(compared to OGTT)
Lower Highest Lower
Identifies IGT No Yes No
Lifestyle prevention
intervention effect
Negative
(for isolated IFG)
Positive
(for IGT +/– IFG)
Limited data
Table 1.1 Comparison of tests to diagnose diabetes and define intermediate hyperglycaemia
CHO, carbohydrate; FPG, fasting plasma glucose; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; HbA1c, glycated haemoglobin; IGT, impaired
glucose tolerance; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test.
Diabetes
Criteria
Definitions of diabetes are universally agreed, with
both WHO and ADA adopting the same FPG, 2 h PG,
and HbA1c diagnostic values (Table 1.2).
WHO criteria ADA criteria
Diabetes
Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) ≥7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL)
2 h plasma glucose* ≥11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) ≥11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)
HbA1c ≥6.5% (48 mmol/mol) ≥6.5% (48 mmol/mol)
Intermediate hyperglycaemia
Impaired fasting glucose (IFG)
Fasting plasma glucose 6.1–6.9 mmol/L (110–125 mg/dL) 5.6–6.9 mmol/L (100–125 mg/dL)
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)
2 h plasma glucose* 7.8–11.0 mmol/L (140–199 mg/dL) 7.8–11.0 mmol/L (140–199 mg/dL)
HbA1c – 5.7%–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol)
*Following a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test.
ADA, American Diabetes Association; HbA1c, glycated haemoglobin; WHO, World Health Organization.
In asymptomatic individuals, two abnormal values
either in the same setting or on separate occasions
are recommended for clinical management.5
Table 1.2 Criteria for defining diabetes and intermediate hyperglycaemia
Chapter 1
Prevalence
Prevalence data for diabetes vary and are
influenced by the method used to identify
individuals with diabetes, which may include
diabetes based on self-report, and/or taking
diabetes-specific medication, and/or testing
of people without known diabetes, and/or
testing people with self-report diabetes but not
taking medication. Furthermore, there is a wellrecognised lack of congruence between FPG,
2 h PG, and HbA1c tests in identifying
individuals as having diabetes.9
In 2024, the International Diabetes Federation
(IDF) reported a global diabetes prevalence in
20–79-year-olds of 11.1% (589 million people),
which was predicted to increase to 853 million
by 2050. Diabetes prevalence was similar in men
and women, highest in those aged 75–79 years,
higher in urban (12.7%) than rural (8.8%) areas,
and in high-income (12.4%) compared to lowincome countries (6.1%). Regional differences
were also noted, with the highest prevalence
in the Middle East and North Africa IDF region
(19.9%) and the lowest in the Africa IDF region
(5.0%), and the largest numbers of people
with diabetes in China (148 million) and India
(90 million).1 Methods for diabetes diagnosis
included any of the three glucose measures,
self-report, medical record or clinic diagnosis, and
extrapolations for countries without data.10
In 2022, the NCD Risk Factor Collaboration
estimated that 828 million adults aged 18 years
and older had diabetes, an increase of 630
million from 1990, with the largest increases in
low- and middle-income countries. The global
age-standardised diabetes prevalence was 13.9%
for women and 14.3% for men. These estimates
were based on defining diabetes as an FPG ≥7.0
mmol/L (126 mg/dL) or an HbA1c ≥6.5% (48
mmol/mol), or taking medication for diabetes.11
Previously undiagnosed diabetes
In 2024, almost one in two (42.8%; 251.7 million)
adults aged 20–79 years old living with diabetes
were undiagnosed. There were significant
regional disparities in undiagnosed diabetes, and
86.9% of all undiagnosed cases were in low- and
middle-income countries. Low-income countries
had the highest proportion of undiagnosed cases
(58.7%), followed by middle-income countries at
45.5%, and high-income countries at 28.9%.1
The lack of congruence between glycaemic
measures impacts reported prevalence of
undiagnosed diabetes. An analysis of previously
undiagnosed diabetes detected by an elevated
FPG, HbA1c, or both reported that globally 29%
of individuals with screen-detected diabetes
had an isolated elevated FPG, 37% had an
isolated elevated HbA1c, and 34% had elevated
levels of both, with substantial variation across
regions. In most low- and middle-income
regions, isolated elevated HbA1c was more
common than isolated elevated FPG. 12 Some of
this disparity may relate to ethnic variations in
the FPG-HbA1c relationship. 13
Intermediate hyperglycaemia
Intermediate hyperglycaemia, also referred
to as “prediabetes”, includes impaired glucose
tolerance (IGT), impaired fasting glucose (IFG),
and intermediate HbA1c. IGT was introduced in
1979 to describe a category of increased risk of
progressing to diabetes.14 IFG was introduced
in 1997 to describe the FPG zone, which was
believed to equate to IGT.15
There are differences in the pathogenesis of
IFG and IGT, with IGT associated with muscle
insulin resistance and defective insulin secretion,
resulting in less efficient disposal of the glucose
load during the OGTT; IFG is associated with
impaired insulin secretion and impaired
suppression of hepatic glucose output.16
Criteria
WHO and ADA criteria are the same for IGT but
are different for defining IFG (Table 1.2), with
WHO using an FPG range of 6.1–6.9 mmol/L
(110–125 mg/dL) and the ADA using an FPG range
of 5.6–6.9 mmol/L (100–125 mg/dL). Based on an
OGTT with measurement of both FPG and 2 h PG,
IH can be subdivided into those with isolated IFG,
isolated IGT, and combined IFG/IGT.
IFG and IGT are not clinical entities but rather
risk factors for future diabetes and adverse
outcomes, and regression to normoglycaemia
is common, ranging from 33% to 59% over 1–5
years of follow-up for IFG and 17% to 42% over
6–11 years of follow-up for IGT.17
In 2009, an International Expert Committee (IEC)
recommended using an HbA1c of 6.0%–6.4%
(42–47 mmol/mol) to identify people with IH.18
An HbA1c intermediate hyperglycaemia category
termed “prediabetes” was adopted by ADA in
2010, defined as an HbA1c of 5.7%–6.4% (39–47
mmol/mol).19 To date, WHO has not made a
recommendation on HbA1c for IH. Other groups
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
such as the UK National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence recommends an HbA1c of
6.0%–6.4% (42–47 mmol/mol).20
Prevalence of intermediate hyperglycaemia
In 2024, IDF estimated the global prevalence of
IGT was 12.0% and that of IFG was 9.2% among
adults aged 20–79 years, with marked regional
differences. Age-adjusted IGT prevalence was
highest in Southeast Asia region (13.8%) and
lowest in Europe region (5.9%). North America
and the Caribbean region showed the highest
IFG prevalence (13.6%) while Europe had again
the lowest (5.4%).1
There are significant differences in prevalence
and congruence of IH identified by different
criteria, and overlap between the various
biochemical tests is only moderate. Although
IFG and intermediate HbA1c were introduced
to achieve alignment with IGT, individuals with
IGT who also had ADA-IFG was 58%, WHO-IFG
was 23%, and ADA-HbA1c was 32%.21 In addition,
the percentage of people without IGT who
have IFG increases substantially with ADA-FPG
versus WHO-FPG.22 The 2015–2016 US NHANES
survey reported IH prevalences ranging from
4.3% with IEC-HbA1c to 43.5% with ADA-IFG. If
a combination of ADA-HbA1c, ADA-FPG, and 2 h
PG was used, the prevalence was 2.5% compared
with 51.3% if any of the three tests was used.23
Progression to diabetes
All measures of IH predict progression to T2DM
without intervention, and incident rates of T2DM
increase with longer periods of follow-up.
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of diabetes
prevention in people with IGT in Asia,24 Europe,25
India,26 and the United States27 reported a
cumulative diabetes incidence of 23%–68% in
the control group in this high-risk group mostly
defined by two abnormal OGTTs.
A Cochrane review reported a cumulative
diabetes incidence in individuals with IGT of
13% after one year and 60% after 20 years
follow-up. The risk of diabetes was highest with
combined IFG and IGT compared to people with
normal glucose tolerance and with isolated IGT.
The cumulative diabetes incidence after
12 years follow-up was 31% for both ADA-IFG
and WHO-IFG; for ADA-HbA1c it was 31% at 10
years follow-up and 29% at 15 years follow-up
for IEC-HbA1c.17 A recent Danish population
study reported a 21% 5-year cumulative
T2DM incidence for IEC-HbA1c.28
Older age is an important consideration. A study
of older adults with a high prevalence of
ADA-FPG and ADA-HbA1c-defined IH reported
that regression to normoglycaemia or death was
more frequent than progression to diabetes.29
Prediction of adverse outcomes
The association between adverse outcomes and
the various definitions of IH has been examined
in two systematic reviews. The first included
129 studies with 10,069,955 individuals30 and
the second included 106 prospective studies
and nearly 1.85 million people from 27
countries.31 Overall, IH was associated with
a significantly increased risk of mortality,
cardiovascular disease (CVD), stroke, and chronic
kidney disease compared with normoglycaemia
across the different definitions of IH, albeit with
some minor, inconsistent differences.
Summary
There are considerable differences in
prevalence with the various individual tests for
IH. Although the absolute reported prevalence
varies, the pattern is consistent, with the
highest prevalences found with ADA-IFG,
ADA-HbA1c, and IGT and the lowest with
WHO-IFG and IEC-HbA1c. 32, 33
Differences in IH prevalences and progression
to T2DM may reflect differences in
pathophysiology and the myriad of ecological
and external factors (e.g., environment,
ecosystem, awareness, cultures, access to
care, and standard of care) as well as host
factors (e.g., ancestry, ethnicity, sex, age,
gender, genetics, life course events, education,
lifestyles, cognitive/psychological behaviours,
coexisting risk factors, and comorbidities) and
their complex interactions. As such, context
and phenotyping are important considerations
in attempts to improve the precision of risk
assessment to maximise the impacts and costeffectiveness of interventions. 34, 35
There are well-documented differences across
ethnic groups based on OGTT, with Asians
highly insulin-sensitive, Africans most insulinresistant, and Caucasians in-between along the
hyperbolic curve between glucose sensitivity
and insulin secretion.36 Data from Uganda
indicate that nearly one-third of people with
incident diabetes have a body mass index (BMI)
<25 kg/m2, with a predominant phenotype of
Chapter 1
reduced pancreatic secretory function.37 These
differences contribute to sub-phenotypes
within the spectrum of dysregulation of glucose
metabolism, which may stem from interethnic
differences in biological responses, influenced
by differences in population-specific genetic and
ecological factors.38
Screening for undiagnosed diabetes and
intermediate hyperglycaemia
Screening for undiagnosed T2DM or for IH are
commonly recommended strategies. Earlier
diagnosis and treatment reduce the risk of
adverse outcomes, and identifying people
with IH provides an opportunity to prevent
progression to diabetes.
The usual approach to screening for
undiagnosed T2DM or IH is based on wellrecognised clinical risk factors (e.g., increasing
age, family history of diabetes, overweight/
obesity, previous history of gestational diabetes,
ethnicity) and/or using formal risk scores
composed of clinical information, followed
by blood testing of glucose or HbA1c.39,40 Risk
scores have been demonstrated to enhance the
performance of biochemical testing.32 Use of
local data to develop a risk score to estimate
absolute risk prediction for diabetes may also
increase precision.
Testing method and frequency of screening
There are considerable differences in the
performance of individual tests for IH and
consequently differences in country and
international recommendations. If a decision is
made to screen, the choice of test procedure and
frequency of testing will need to be determined
by a country’s health services, taking into
account available resources. Within-country
differences in recommendations underscore
the lack of universal consensus.7, 41 While
guidelines recommend repeat testing to confirm
a diagnosis of diabetes in an asymptomatic
individual, there are no guidelines regarding
repeat testing to confirm IH.42
The 1 h OGTT – a proposed new approach to
testing for intermediate hyperglycaemia
Decades ago, the 2 h OGTT was a five-sample
test with glucose measured at 0, 30, 60, 90,
and 120 minutes. Later the 30-, 60-, and 90-min
samples were eliminated, leaving the modern
day OGTT with only FPG and 2 h PG. Recently,
the value of the 1 h PG during an OGTT has
been revisited in an IDF Position Statement.
Epidemiological data demonstrate the value of
a 1 h PG ≥8.6 mmol/L (155 mg/dL) in predicting
diabetes and associated complications, even in
people with otherwise normal glucose tolerance,
and a 1 h PG ≥11.6 mmol/L (210 mg/dL) for
diagnosing T2DM. The IDF Position Statement
suggests the 1 h PG as a more sensitive and
practical method than other current biochemical
tests and calls for redefining current diagnostic
criteria for IH and T2DM by adding the 1 h PG as
a diagnostic option.43 The evidence supporting
the utility of the 1 h PG during an OGTT is
comprehensively detailed in the IDF Position
Statement and is therefore not reviewed further
in this Chapter.
In time, the 1 h PG OGTT may be adopted
for detecting IH. Using a 1 h OGTT may not
necessarily overcome the practical and health
system challenges of the 2 h OGTT, even
though it is a shorter test. An additional test
for detecting IH may find increased prevalence
rates and incongruence in classifying individuals
with IH evident with currently available tests.
While it is likely that individuals with an elevated
1 h PG will benefit from diabetes prevention
interventions similar to those with IGT, there are
currently no supporting clinical trial data.
Diabetes prevention
There are two complementary
approaches to reducing the incidence
of type 2 diabetes:
o The individual-based high-risk
approach with interventions in
higher risk individuals
o The population approach to reduce
diabetes risk factors across the
entire population
The individual-based high-risk approach
This strategy involves identifying individuals
at higher risk of developing T2DM by screening
and testing for IH, followed by offering lifestyle
interventions. Successful randomised diabetes
prevention studies have targeted individuals with
IGT, and a recent review reported a lack of effect
of lifestyle intervention in individuals with isolated
IFG.44 However, the situation may be different for
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
pharmacological interventions to prevent diabetes
for glucose- or HbA1c-defined IH.45, 46
There are limited data on the effectiveness
of lifestyle intervention in individuals with IH
identified by HbA1c. The US Diabetes Prevention
Program (DPP) evaluated treatment effects (in
participants with IH identified by HbA1c) on
incident diabetes, defined by HbA1c ≥6.5% (48
mmol/mol). Lifestyle intervention and metformin
reduced diabetes incidence by 49% and 44%,
respectively, during the DPP , and by 29% and
38%, respectively, during the 10-year followup. In contrast to the superiority of the lifestyle
intervention on glucose-defined diabetes,
metformin and lifestyle interventions had similar
effects in preventing HbA1c-defined diabetes.47
Interventions to prevent or delay development
of T2DM in high-risk individuals
review reported a significant reduction in
incident T2DM in people with IGT with or without
IFG (but not in isolated IFG) who received diet
and exercise counselling.53 The lack of effect
in IFG has been confirmed in a more recent
systematic review of data from other studies.44
Diabetes prevention or delay persists but
decreases over time as demonstrated after 20
years in the China Da Qing Diabetes Prevention
Study, with intervention participants having 3.6
fewer years with diabetes. However, residual
risk of progression to diabetes was high: 80% in
the intervention group and 93% in the control
group after 20 years.54 The Finnish DPS reported
an ongoing reduction in incident T2DM over
the 13-year follow-up. The cumulative incidence
of diabetes was 44% in the intervention group
and 64% in the control group, with an estimated
five-year delay in deterioration from IGT to overt
T2DM.55 The US Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study also showed sustained diabetes
prevention in the intervention versus control
group after 12 years.56
Emerging data from long-term observational
studies of RCTs suggest a possible beneficial
effect on vascular complications,57 including a
lower risk of severe retinopathy after 20 years of
follow-up,58 and a significant 41% risk reduction
in CVD and 29% reduction in all-cause death in
the intervention group after 23 years.59
Pharmacotherapy
Several studies have assessed the effect of
various glucose-lowering medications on T2DM
prevention. A Cochrane review reported the
superiority of metformin in reducing incident
T2DM compared with standard diet and exercise
but it was not different compared with intensive
diet and exercise, acarbose, thiazolidinediones, or
when combined with intensive lifestyle compared
with intensive lifestyle alone.60 However, a recent
RCT reported a 17% significantly lower risk of
incident T2DM with metformin plus lifestyle
intervention compared with lifestyle intervention
alone, but with more adverse gastrointestinal
side effects.61 Data on long-term outcomes are
limited except for the US DPP which showed no
difference in microvascular complications in the
metformin versus the comparative group after
15 years follow-up.62
Other agents which significantly reduced
diabetes incidence include acarbose,63
thiazolidinediones,45 glucagon-like peptide-1
receptor agonists,64 and sodium-glucose
cotransporter-2 inhibitors.46
Several systematic reviews and
meta-analyses have demonstrated
an association between incident
T2DM and diet or dietary components,
including:
o High glycaemic index (GI) foods
and high glycaemic load (GL) diets
increase risk.48
o Consumption of foods and dietary
components from plant-based
sources, such as whole grain
products, fibre, vegetable fats, and
plant proteins, reduces risk. 49
o A higher intake of red meat,
processed meat, and sugarsweetened beverages increases risk.50
o A high intake of vegetable fat
lowers T2DM incidence but total
fat intake is not associated with
incident T2DM. 50
o Substituting plant protein for animal
protein may decrease T2DM risk.51
o Vegetarian diets are associated
with reduced T2DM incidence. 52
Randomised controlled studies
Diet and physical activity
Lifestyle changes are effective in preventing or
delaying the development of T2DM. A Cochrane
Chapter 1
Community and national programmes
Several programmes have translated the highrisk individual lifestyle-based T2DM diabetes
prevention RCTs into large-scale community
and national prevention programmes.
The US National Diabetes Prevention
Program (US NDPP)
US NDPP is a lifestyle intervention programme
to prevent T2DM in at-risk people age ≥18
years old identified by HbA1c, FPG, or OGTT, or
previous gestational diabetes, or positive ADA
risk test. The programme is overseen by the
Centre for Disease Control (CDC) and promotes
≥5% weight loss over one year delivered via
in-person classes, distance learning, online
programming, or a combination of modalities.
There are a total of 26 sessions and at least
22 must be completed for the individual to
achieve CDC recognition for completing the
programme. Analysis of 14,747 adults enrolled
in the programme reported that 36% achieved
the 5% weight loss goal (average weight loss
4.2%). As yet, incident T2DM has not been
systematically evaluated. 65
The Finnish National Diabetes Prevention
Programme (FIN-D2D)
FIN-D2D is a community-based lifestyle
modification T2DM prevention programme
delivered in primary and occupational health
care, predominantly through groups.66
Individuals are screened for high risk with the
Finnish Diabetes Risk Score (FINDRISC) and are
then referred for OGTT. Evaluation of 2,730
individuals with complete follow-up data showed
that in those who lost 2.5%–4.9% body weight
and ≥5% during the first year, risk for incident
medication-treated diabetes after 7.4 years
was significantly reduced by 37% and 29%,
respectively, compared with those with stable
weight. There were no significant differences in
CVD events or all-cause mortality.67
The UK National Health Service Diabetes
Prevention Programme (NHS DPP)
This programme is offered to individuals aged
≥18 years with an HbA1c 6.0–6.4% (42–47
mmol/mol) or FPG 5.5–6.9 mmol/L (100–125
mg/dL) through 13 lifestyle modification
education sessions delivered by face-to-face
groups or a digital service. An assessment
of 17,252 individuals who completed the
programme demonstrated a mean weight loss
of 3.3 kg and an HbA1c reduction of 0.19% (2.04
mmol/mol). T2DM incident was not reported. 68
Australian Victorian Life! Taking Action on
Diabetes Program
This is a community-based diabetes prevention
programme with individuals at risk of developing
diabetes identified by a national risk score. An
evaluation of 8,412 participants who commenced
a Life! Program (of whom 37% completed all six
education sessions) showed an average weight
loss of 2.4 kg (2.7%) in completers and 1.4 kg
weight loss in those attending 1–5 sessions.69
Middle-income countries
A review of six RCTs of community-based lifestyle
interventions included three studies (Chennai
and Kerala, India, and one from rural China)
reported diabetes incidence in 1,921 individuals.
The review found a non-significant reduction in
diabetes incidence at 12 months compared with
controls. Significant reductions were observed in
weight (2.3 kg) and in FPG and HbA1c.70
A lifestyle diabetes prevention programme
in primary care settings in Thailand in 1,093
individuals with IGT reported a significant 28%
reduction in incident diabetes after two years
compared with the control group, accompanied by
body weight reduction of 1.5 kg in the intervention
group and a 0.4 kg increase in the control group.71
South Africa
Lifestyle Africa is a culturally adapted version
of the US DPP with a lifestyle intervention of 17
video-based group sessions delivered by trained
community health workers. An assessment of
494 enrolled participants reported a mean weight
change of 0.6% in the intervention group, not
significantly different to the 0.4% in the control
group. However, HbA1c was significantly lower
(mean difference 0.24% [2.58 mmol/mol]).72
The population approach
Strategies to improve the health of the entire
population by reducing modifiable risk
factors for NCDs are an integral part of T2DM
prevention. Reducing population diabetes risk
factors results in a small downward shift in
average population levels of diabetes risk, which
can lead to a significant reduction in diabetes.
This can be achieved by encouraging a healthy
diet and regular physical activity, preventing
overweight and obesity, and reducing other
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
health risks such as smoking, excessive alcohol
intake, improving sleep, and minimising climaterelated health effects.
Common strategies to drive population
change include increasing health-promoting
environments, embedding health-promoting
activities in everyday life, education and social
media campaigns, and reducing marketing and
the promotion of unhealthy foods, especially
to children. Effective societal strategies
include legislation (e.g., sugar tax) to reduce
consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages,
food reformulation, improved food labelling,
and changing the physical environment (e.g.,
reduce pollution, provide living and leisure
space). Broader population-based measures
are also important, including improving general
education, reducing poverty, ensuring food
security, and raising health awareness – all
underpinned by universal health coverage and a
robust primary care and health system.38 These
interventions can be incorporated in diabetes
prevention programmes.66
Summary
Randomised controlled studies have
demonstrated the effective prevention of T2DM
in people with IGT across different populations
but a lack of effect in people with isolated IFG.
The effect on incident diabetes persists but
declines over time. Emerging evidence suggests
a decline in some adverse diabetes outcomes.
Several countries and settings have translated this
evidence into community-based programmes,
with differences in target population, method
of identifying high-risk individuals, and the
intervention content and delivery. Overall, the
degree of weight loss is less than in RCTs and data
on incident diabetes are lacking.
Including strategies to reduce population
diabetes risk is an important component of
diabetes prevention programmes.
Implementing diabetes prevention
programmes
Diabetes prevention programmes should ideally
include both high-risk and population strategies.
Encouragingly, the incidence of diagnosed
diabetes appears to be stabilising or declining in
many higher-income countries, with a reported
annual estimated change in incidence ranging
from –1.1% to –10.8% since 2010. Multifaceted
T2DM prevention activities in individuals at high
risk of T2DM and population-wide approaches
may be factors in this observation.73 Population
strategies require lobbying and influencing
national policy makers. The focus of this section is
implementing programmes for high-risk individuals.
The essential components of programmes
targeting high-risk individuals are universally
agreed (Figure 1.1). However, there are a number
of questions which need to be considered in
developing and implementing a community or
Figure 1.1 Overview of high-risk type 2 diabetes screening and prevention programmes
†Programme content and delivery dependent on local resources.
FPG, fasting plasma glucose; HbA1c, glycated haemoglobin; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test.
Chapter 1
Programme delivery
Established programmes have varied widely
with respect to number of education sessions
(ranging from 4–22), the way the programme
is delivered (face-to-face individual or group,
online), and the follow-up support offered.
Programmes have also differed with respect to
training, qualifications, and accreditation of the
education trainers who deliver the programme.
Awareness, enrolment, and retention
In Finland, 25% of men and 48% of women
reported being aware of the FIN-D2D programme
in the area where it was being rolled out,
compared with 20% men and 36% of women
in the control area.77 Community-based
programmes have consistently highlighted
the challenge of enrolment and retention. In
the Victorian Diabetes Program, over 29,000
individuals showed interest in the programme,
15,000 were referred, approximately 8,500
commenced the programme, and 3,000 attended
all six programme sessions.69 In the UK NHS
Diabetes Prevention Programme by December
2018, nearly 325,000 people were referred,
approximately 150,000 attended the initial
assessment, and approximately 95,000 attended
at least one of 13 group-based intervention
sessions with approximately half completing the
intervention (attending >60% of sessions).68
Attendance may be influenced by the mode of
programme delivery, with assessment of over
330,000 US National DPP participants showing
that the average number of sessions attended was
highest for in-person participants (68%), online
(57%), distance learning (55%), and combination
(49%), with a similar pattern for average weeks
in the programme. Among participants who
remained in the programme for all sessions,
average weight loss exceeded the programme
goal of 5% for all delivery modes.78 Results were
similar for the South African programme – average
attendance across all sessions and groups was
54%, with 35% attending at least 75% of sessions
across all groups.79
Scalability
Scalability and reach remain a challenge. The US
National DPP has been successful in offering the
programme to over 700,000 at-risk participants
since it began in 2012 but there are an estimated
nearly 100 million Americans with IH. One
approach which has been taken to improve
reach is to incorporate diabetes prevention
national diabetes prevention programme for
high-risk individuals.
Risk assessment and screening
Most programmes target a specific age group
for screening rather than offering universal
screening but differ in the selected age, which
is decided based on local risk and resources.
Many guidelines suggest initial screening with
a risk score to identify high-risk individuals.
Developing or adapting a risk score using local
data may increase predictive precision.
Screening for high risk is complex and
challenging on a large scale. The strongest
evidence for successful lifestyle intervention is
for people with IGT, which can only be diagnosed
by an OGTT.44 However, OGTT screening has
practical limitations for both the health system
and participants, especially if it is also to be used
for routine follow-up assessment. Given these
practical challenges, many national programmes
use HbA1c or FPG to identify high-risk individuals
for interventions to reduce progression to T2DM.
While the US DPP includes testing with any of
the three tests for identifying IH, the most used
tests are HbA1c and FPG rather than an OGTT.
The UK DPP advocates blood testing with HbA1c
or FPG. The Hong Kong Chronic Co-Care Pilot
Scheme includes screening for IH based on an
HbA1c of 6.0%–6.4% (42–47 mmol/mol) or FPG
6.1–6.9 mmol/L (110–125 mg/dL).74
Advances in understanding the heterogenous
nature of IH and in technology may increase the
precision with which the highest-risk individuals
can be identified for a programme based on
selective use of OGTT, depending on available
resources. Options include stratifying levels of
risk and recommending OGTT testing in the
younger highest-risk category.75 Another option
is the 1 h OGTT PG.
Screening for diabetes prevention programmes
requires balancing the evidence, practicalities,
potential impact, and cost. A comparison of a
range of screening scenarios, including OGTT,
FPG, and HbA1c alone or following risk score
assessment explored the potential impact on
reducing incident diabetes and cost. Compared
with OGTT testing, costs of screening and
prevention were substantially lower with an
initial assessment with a risk score, followed
by a blood test, but the potential for diabetes
prevention was reduced by 35% to 75%. With
all scenarios, there will be some lower-risk
individuals who will develop diabetes.76
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
into broader NCD prevention initiatives.
Some programmes offer financial incentives
to encourage risk assessment and subsidise
lifestyle educational interventions.
Implementation
If a decision is made to have a diabetes
prevention programme for high-risk individuals,
the design will need to be decided according to
local practice, local resources, feasibility, and
cost. Data systems and evaluation are important
components of the programme to facilitate
quality improvement.
REFERENCES
1. International Diabetes Federation (IDF). IDF
Diabetes Atlas. 11th edition. Brussels, Belgium:
International Diabetes Federation, 2025.
Available from: http://www.diabetesatlas.org.
2. World Health Organization. Assessing
national capacity for the prevention and
control of noncommunicable diseases:
report of the 2019 global survey [Internet].
Geneva: WHO; 2020]. Available from:
https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/331452.
[Accessed February 2025].
3. PAHO/NMH/NV/21-0041 Pan American
Health Organization, 2021. Country
snapshot of diabetes prevention and control
in the Americas. Available from: https://iris.
paho.org/handle/10665.2/55326. [Accessed
February 2025].
4. Rahim NE, Flood D, Marcus ME, et al. Diabetes
risk and provision of diabetes prevention
activities in 44 low-income and middleincome countries: a cross-sectional analysis
of nationally representative, individuallevel survey data. Lancet Glob Health.
2023;11(10):e1576-e1586.
5. World Health Organization. Definition
and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and
intermediate hyperglycaemia - report of
a WHO/IDF consultation. World Health
Organization 2006. Available from: https://
www.who.int/publications/i/item/definitionand-diagnosis-of-diabetes-mellitus-andintermediate-hyperglycaemia. [Accessed
February 2025].
6. Bonora E, Tuomilehto J. The pros and cons of
diagnosing diabetes with A1C. Diabetes Care.
2011;34 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):S184-190.
7. American Diabetes Association Professional
Practice C. 2. Diagnosis and Classification of
Diabetes: Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025.
Diabetes Care. 2025;48(Supplement_1):S27-S49.
8. World Health Organization. Use of Glycated
Haemoglobin (HbA1c) in the Diagnosis of
Diabetes Mellitus. 2011. WHO/NMH/CHP/
CPM/11.1 Available from: https://apps.who.
int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/70523/WHO_
NMH_CHP_CPM_11.1_eng.pdf. [Accessed
February 2025].
9. Cowie CC, Rust KF, Byrd-Holt DD, et al.
Prevalence of diabetes and high risk for
diabetes using A1C criteria in the U.S.
population in 1988-2006. Diabetes Care.
2010;33(3):562-568.
10. Sun H, Saeedi P , Karuranga S, et al. IDF
Diabetes Atlas: Global, regional and countrylevel diabetes prevalence estimates for 2021
and projections for 2045. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract. 2022;183:109119.
11. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. Worldwide
trends in diabetes prevalence and treatment
from 1990 to 2022: a pooled analysis of
1108 population-representative studies
with 141 million participants. Lancet.
2024;404(10467):2077-2093.
12. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. Global
variation in diabetes diagnosis and prevalence
based on fasting glucose and hemoglobin
A1c. Nat Med. 2023;29(11):2885-2901.
13. Ram Y, Xu Y, Cheng A, et al. Variation in
the relationship between fasting glucose
and HbA1c: implications for the diagnosis
of diabetes in different age and ethnic
groups. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care.
2024;12(2):e003470.
14. National Diabetes Data Group. Classification
and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and other
categories of glucose intolerance. Diabetes.
1979;28(12):1039-1057.
15. The Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
Classification of Diabetes Mellitus. Report of
the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
Classification of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes
Care. 1997;20(7):1183-1197.
16. Abdul-Ghani MA, Jenkinson CP , Richardson DK,
et al. Insulin secretion and action in subjects
with impaired fasting glucose and impaired
glucose tolerance: results from the Veterans
Administration Genetic Epidemiology Study.
Diabetes. 2006;55(5):1430-1435.
17. Richter B, Hemmingsen B, Metzendorf
MI, et al. Development of type 2 diabetes
mellitus in people with intermediate
hyperglycaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2018;10(10):CD012661.
Chapter 1
18. International Expert Committee. International
Expert Committee report on the role of
the A1C assay in the diagnosis of diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2009;32(7):1327-1334.
19. Zhang X, Gregg EW, Williamson DF, et al. A1C
level and future risk of diabetes: a systematic
review. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(7):1665-1673.
20. National Insititue for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE). Type 2 diabetes:
prevention in people at high risk. Guidance
and guidelines. Available from: https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph38/chapter/
Recommendations#risk-assessment.
[Accessed February 2025].
21. James C, Bullard KM, Rolka DB, et al.
Implications of alternative definitions of
prediabetes for prevalence in U.S. adults.
Diabetes Care. 2011;34(2):387-391.
22. Glumer C, Jorgensen T, Borch-Johnsen K, et al.
Prevalences of diabetes and impaired glucose
regulation in a Danish population: the Inter99
study. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(8):2335-2340.
23. Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Selvin E. Prediabetes and
what it means: The epidemiological evidence.
Annu Rev Public Health. 2021;42:59-77.
24. Pan XR, Li GW, Hu YH, et al. Effects of diet
and exercise in preventing NIDDM in people
with impaired glucose tolerance. The Da
Qing IGT and Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care.
1997;20(4):537-544.
25. Tuomilehto J, Lindstrom J, Eriksson JG, et al.
Prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus by
changes in lifestyle among subjects with
impaired glucose tolerance. N Engl J Med.
2001;344(18):1343-1350.
26. Ramachandran A, Snehalatha C, Mary
S, et al. The Indian Diabetes Prevention
Programme shows that lifestyle modification
and metformin prevent type 2 diabetes
in Asian Indian subjects with impaired
glucose tolerance (IDPP-1). Diabetologia.
2006;49(2):289-297.
27. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al.
Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes
with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl
J Med. 2002;346(6):393-403.
28. Nicolaisen SK, Pedersen L, Witte DR, et al.
HbA1c-defined prediabetes and progression
to type 2 diabetes in Denmark: A populationbased study based on routine clinical care
laboratory data. Diabetes Res Clin Pract.
2023;203:110829.
29. Rooney MR, Rawlings AM, Pankow JS, et al.
Risk of progression to diabetes among older
adults with prediabetes. JAMA Intern Med.
2021;181(4):511-519.
30. Cai X, Zhang Y, Li M, et al. Association between
prediabetes and risk of all cause mortality
and cardiovascular disease: updated metaanalysis. BMJ. 2020;370:m2297.
31. Gujral UP , Jagannathan R, He S, et al.
Association between varying cut-points of
intermediate hyperglycemia and risk of
mortality, cardiovascular events and chronic
kidney disease: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care.
2021;9(1):e001776.
32. Schmidt MI, Bracco PA, Yudkin JS, et al.
Intermediate hyperglycaemia to predict
progression to type 2 diabetes (ELSA-Brasil):
an occupational cohort study in Brazil. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2019;7(4):267-277.
33. Lee CMY, Colagiuri S, Woodward M, et al.
Comparing different definitions of prediabetes
with subsequent risk of diabetes: an individual
participant data meta-analysis involving 76
513 individuals and 8208 cases of incident
diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care.
2019;7(1):e000794.
34. Chung WK, Erion K, Florez JC, et al. Precision
medicine in diabetes: a Consensus Report
from the American Diabetes Association
(ADA) and the European Association for
the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetologia.
2020;63(9):1671-1693.
35. Herman WH, Ye W. Precision prevention of
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2023;46(11):1894-1896.
36. Kodama K, Tojjar D, Yamada S, et al. Ethnic
differences in the relationship between insulin
sensitivity and insulin response: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Care.
2013;36(6):1789-1796.
37. Kibirige D, Sekitoleko I, Lumu W, et al.
Understanding the pathogenesis of lean nonautoimmune diabetes in an African population
with newly diagnosed diabetes. Diabetologia.
2022;65(4):675-683.
38. Chan JCN, Lim LL, Wareham NJ, et al. The
Lancet Commission on diabetes: Using data
to transform diabetes care and patient lives.
Lancet. 2021;396(10267):2019-2082.
39. Lindstrom J, Tuomilehto J. The diabetes risk
score: a practical tool to predict type 2 diabetes
risk. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(3):725-731.
40. American Diabetes Association Professional
Practice Committee. 3. Prevention or Delay
of Diabetes and Associated Comorbidities:
Standards of Care in Diabetes-2024. Diabetes
Care. 2024;47(Suppl 1):S43-S51.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
SCREENING AND PREVENTION
41. Davidson KW, Barry MJ, et al., US Preventive
Services Task Force. Screening for prediabetes
and type 2 diabetes: US Preventive Services
Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA.
2021;326(8):736-743.
42. Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Perreault L, Ji L, et al.
Diagnosis and management of prediabetes: A
review. JAMA. 2023;329(14):1206-1216.
43. Bergman M, Manco M, Satman I, et al.
International Diabetes Federation Position
Statement on the 1-hour post-load plasma
glucose for the diagnosis of intermediate
hyperglycaemia and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract. 2024;209:111589.
44. Sathish T, Khunti K, Narayan KMV, et al.
Effect of conventional lifestyle interventions
on type 2 diabetes incidence by glucosedefined prediabetes phenotype: An
individual participant data meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Care.
2023;46(11):1903-1907.
45. Gerstein HC, Yusuf S, et al. Effect of rosiglitazone
on the frequency of diabetes in patients with
impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting
glucose: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2006;368(9541):1096-1105.
46. Rossing P , Inzucchi SE, Vart P , et al.
Dapagliflozin and new-onset type 2 diabetes
in patients with chronic kidney disease or
heart failure: pooled analysis of the DAPA-CKD
and DAPA-HF trials. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2022;10(1):24-34.
47. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
HbA1c as a predictor of diabetes and as an
outcome in the diabetes prevention program:
a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Care.
2015;38(1):51-58.
48. Jenkins DJA, Willett WC, Yusuf S, et al.
Association of glycaemic index and glycaemic
load with type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, cancer, and all-cause mortality:
a meta-analysis of mega cohorts of more
than 100 000 participants. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2024;12(2):107-118.
49. Neuenschwander M, Ballon A, Weber
KS, et al. Role of diet in type 2 diabetes
incidence: umbrella review of meta-analyses
of prospective observational studies. BMJ.
2019;366:l2368.
50. Neuenschwander M, Barbaresko J, Pischke CR,
et al. Intake of dietary fats and fatty acids and
the incidence of type 2 diabetes: A systematic
review and dose-response meta-analysis of
prospective observational studies. PLoS Med.
2020;17(12):e1003347.
51. Li J, Glenn AJ, Yang Q, et al. Dietary protein
sources, mediating biomarkers, and incidence
of type 2 diabetes: Findings from the Women’s
Health Initiative and the UK Biobank. Diabetes
Care. 2022;45(8):1742-1753.
52. Lee Y, Park K. Adherence to a vegetarian
diet and diabetes risk: A systematic review
and meta-analysis of observational studies.
Nutrients. 2017;9(6):603.
53. Hemmingsen B, Gimenez-Perez G, Mauricio
D, et al. Diet, physical activity or both for
prevention or delay of type 2 diabetes
mellitus and its associated complications in
people at increased risk of developing type 2
diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2017;12(12):CD003054.
54. Li G, Zhang P , Wang J, et al. The long-term
effect of lifestyle interventions to prevent
diabetes in the China Da Qing Diabetes
Prevention Study: a 20-year follow-up study.
Lancet. 2008;371(9626):1783-1789.
55. Lindstrom J, Peltonen M, Eriksson JG, et al.
Improved lifestyle and decreased diabetes
risk over 13 years: long-term follow-up of
the randomised Finnish Diabetes Prevention
Study (DPS). Diabetologia. 2013;56(2):284-293.
56. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Long-term effects of lifestyle intervention
or metformin on diabetes development and
microvascular complications over 15-year
follow-up: the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2015;3(11):866-875.
57. Nathan DM, Bennett PH, Crandall JP , et al.
Does diabetes prevention translate into
reduced long-term vascular complications of
diabetes? Diabetologia. 2019;62(8):1319-1328.
58. Gong Q, Gregg EW, Wang J, et al. Long-term
effects of a randomised trial of a 6-year
lifestyle intervention in impaired glucose
tolerance on diabetes-related microvascular
complications: the China Da Qing Diabetes
Prevention Outcome Study. Diabetologia.
2011;54(2):300-307.
59. Li G, Zhang P , Wang J, et al. Cardiovascular
mortality, all-cause mortality, and diabetes
incidence after lifestyle intervention for people
with impaired glucose tolerance in the Da
Qing Diabetes Prevention Study: a 23-year
follow-up study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2014;2(6):474-480.
60. Madsen KS, Chi Y, Metzendorf MI, et al.
Metformin for prevention or delay of type
2 diabetes mellitus and its associated
complications in persons at increased risk
Chapter 1
for the development of type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2019;12(12):CD008558.
61. Zhang L, Zhang Y, Shen S, et al. Safety and
effectiveness of metformin plus lifestyle
intervention compared with lifestyle
intervention alone in preventing progression
to diabetes in a Chinese population with
impaired glucose regulation: a multicentre,
open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2023;11(8):567-577.
62. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Long-term effects of lifestyle intervention
or metformin on diabetes development and
microvascular complications over 15-year
follow-up: the Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2015;3(11):866-75.
63. Chiasson JL, Josse RG, Gomis R, et al. Acarbose
for prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus:
the STOP-NIDDM randomised trial. Lancet.
2002;359(9323):2072-2077.
64. le Roux CW, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al. 3
years of liraglutide versus placebo for
type 2 diabetes risk reduction and weight
management in individuals with prediabetes:
a randomised, double-blind trial. Lancet.
2017;389(10077):1399-1409.
65. Ely EK, Gruss SM, Luman ET, et al. A
national effort to prevent type 2 diabetes:
Participant-level evaluation of CDC’s National
Diabetes Prevention Program. Diabetes Care.
2017;40(10):1331-1341.
66. Saaristo T, Peltonen M, KeinanenKiukaanniemi S, et al. National type 2 diabetes
prevention programme in Finland: FIN-D2D.
Int J Circumpolar Health. 2007;66(2):101-112.
67. Rintamaki R, Rautio N, Peltonen M, et al.
Long-term outcomes of lifestyle intervention
to prevent type 2 diabetes in people at high
risk in primary health care. Prim Care Diabetes.
2021;15(3):444-450.
68. Valabhji J, Barron E, Bradley D, et al. Early
outcomes from the English National Health
Service Diabetes Prevention Programme.
Diabetes Care. 2020;43(1):152-160.
69. Dunbar JA, Jayawardena A, Johnson G,
et al. Scaling up diabetes prevention in
Victoria, Australia: policy development,
implementation, and evaluation. Diabetes Care.
2014;37(4):934-942.
70. Shirinzadeh M, Afshin-Pour B, Angeles R, et
al. The effect of community-based programs
on diabetes prevention in low- and middleincome countries: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Global Health. 2019;15(1):10.
71. Aekplakorn W, Tantayotai V, Numsangkul
S, et al. Evaluation of a communitybased Diabetes Prevention Program in
Thailand: A cluster randomized controlled
trial. J Prim Care Community Health.
2019;10:2150132719847374.
72. Catley D, Puoane T, Tsolekile L, et al.
Evaluation of an adapted version of
the Diabetes Prevention Program for
low- and middle-income countries: A
cluster randomized trial to evaluate
“Lifestyle Africa” in South Africa. PLoS Med.
2022;19(4):e1003964.
73. Magliano DJ, Chen L, Islam RM, et al. Trends
in the incidence of diagnosed diabetes: a
multicountry analysis of aggregate data
from 22 million diagnoses in high-income
and middle-income settings. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2021;9(4):203-211.
74. Government-funded healthcare programme.
Available from: https://www.qhms.com/en/
services/public-private-partnership/ccdcpilot-scheme. [Accessed February 2025].
75. Zhang Y, Luk AOY, Chow E, et al. High risk
of conversion to diabetes in first-degree
relatives of individuals with young-onset
type 2 diabetes: a 12-year follow-up analysis.
Diabet Med. 2017;34(12):1701-1709.
76. Lee CMY, Versace VL, Malo JA, et al. Screening
for diabetes prevention with diabetes risk
scores - A balancing act. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract. 2018;135:120-127.
77. Wikstrom K, Lindstrom J, Tuomilehto J, et
al. National diabetes prevention program
(DEHKO): awareness and self-reported lifestyle
changes in Finnish middle-aged population.
Public Health. 2015;129(3):210-217.
78. Ely EK, Ng BP , Cannon MJ. Delivering the
National Diabetes Prevention Program:
Assessment of outcomes in in-person
and virtual organizations. J Diabetes Res.
2023;2023:8894593.
79. Catley D, Puoane T, Goggin K, et al. Adapting
the Diabetes Prevention Program for lowand middle-income countries: preliminary
implementation findings from lifestyle Africa.
Transl Behav Med. 2020;10(1):46-54.
Glycaemic Control
Assessment and Targets
In Type 2 Diabetes
Chapter 2
GLYCAEMIC TARGETS
Chapter 2
Optimal Care Basic Care
Glycated
haemoglobin
(HbA1c)
• Measure HbA1c at regular intervals
• HbA1c general target 7.0% (53
mmol/mol)
• Personalise HbA1c
- higher in the elderly
- lower in the newly diagnosed
• Measure fructosamine if HbA1c
cannot be measured accurately
• Measure HbA1c at regular intervals
• HbA1c general target 7.0% (53
mmol/mol)
• Personalise HbA1c (especially in the
elderly)
• If HbA1c assay not available, use any
available glucose measure
Self-monitoring
of blood glucose
(SMBG)
• Routinely recommend SMBG to all
insulin-treated people with type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
• Consider SMBG in other people with
T2DM
• Provide education in structured
SMBG
• Routinely recommend SMBG to
people with T2DM treated with
multiple daily insulin regimens
• Consider SMBG in other people with
T2DM treated with other insulin
regimens
• Provide education in structured
SMBG
• SMBG targets:
Fasting and pre-prandial glucose
- 4.0–8.0 mmol/L (70–144 mg/dL)
Postprandial glucose†
- 4.0–8.0 mmol/L (70–144 mg/dL) (preferable)
- 4.0–9.0 mmol/L (70–160 mg/dL) (acceptable)
Continuous
glucose
monitoring (CGM)
• Consider CGM in all insulin-treated
people with T2DM and in others on
an individual basis
• Consider short-term CGM in select
people with T2DM on intensive
insulin regimens or insulin pump, if
available and affordable
• CGM targets (refer to Table 2.1)
†Measure postprandial glucose 1–2 h after beginning a meal.
RECOMMENDATIONS
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
GLYCAEMIC TARGETS
o Glycaemic control reduces the risk of both micro- and macrovascular complications in
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
o Assessing and monitoring glycaemia is an essential component of guiding treatment
decisions to achieve and maintain target glycaemic control.
o Setting glycaemic targets is based on established associations with adverse outcomes.
o HbA1c is the established gold standard for assessing glycaemic control in T2DM.
o The general HbA1c target of <7.0% (<53 mmol/mol) should be personalised, balancing
reducing complications, minimising hypoglycaemia and an individual’s characteristics.
o HbA1c measurement may be affected by a variety of factors – in these situations,
fructosamine and glycated albumin are alternatives for monitoring glycaemic control.
o Improving HbA1c improves diabetes outcomes in the short- and longer-term.
o HbA1c variability may be important but has not been definitively confirmed as an
independent risk factor for diabetes complications.
o The contribution of fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and postprandial glucose (PPG) to
overall glycaemia varies according to HbA1c levels, being greater for PPG at lower HbA1c
levels and greater for FPG at higher HbA1c levels.
o In select individuals with T2DM, HbA1c measurement may be complemented with selfmonitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) or continuous glucose monitoring (CGM).
o SMBG and CGM may provide additional useful clinical information on glycaemic
metrics relevant to diabetes management, including periods of hyperglycaemia and
hypoglycaemia.
o SMBG is recommended in insulin-treated T2DM but may be useful in other situations.
o SMBG use (intensity and frequency) should be structured and individualised.
o The proposed SMBG targets are adapted to align with CGM metrics.
o CGM is currently used mainly in people with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) but use is
increasing in insulin-treated T2DM in high-resource health settings. Data supporting its
use in non-insulin treated people with T2DM are limited.
o Key CGM metrics include glycaemic variability and time in defined glucose ranges.
o Target CGM metrics are based on international consensus.
o Most of the global diabetes population lives in low-income and middle-income countries
(LMICs) where access and affordability to HbA1c testing, SMBG, and CGM are limited.
KEY POINTS
Chapter 2
BACKGROUND
Glycaemic control is a treatment pillar
for reducing the risk of both micro- and
macrovascular complications in type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM),1 and early and intensive
glycaemic control has a legacy effect in reducing
cardiovascular and kidney disease events and allcause mortality even after 24 years.2 Assessing
and monitoring glycaemia are essential
components of guiding treatment decisions to
achieve and maintain target glycaemic control.
Measurement of glycated haemoglobin
(HbA1c) underpins the assessment of longterm glycaemic control in people with T2DM.
In select individuals with T2DM, this may be
complemented with self-monitoring of blood
glucose (SMBG) by finger-stick capillary devices
or continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices
which measure interstitial glucose. SMBG and
CGM may provide additional useful clinical
information on other dimensions of glycaemia
relevant to diabetes management, including
periods of hyperglycaemia and hypoglycaemia.
Determining glycaemic targets is based on the
established association of adverse diabetes
outcomes derived from epidemiological studies
or post-hoc analyses of intervention studies.
Observational studies have shown a relationship
between HbA1c and macro- and microvascular
complications, and death in people with
T2DM.3 Interventional randomised controlled
trials (RCTs) examining the effect of intensive
glycaemic control have achieved HbA1c levels
ranging from 6.5%–7.1% (48–54 mmol/mol).4-8
Identifying actual “thresholds” in the HbA1c/
complications relationship has given differing
results. For example, post-hoc analyses of the
ADVANCE trial suggest an HbA1c “threshold” of
below 7.0% (53 mmol/mol) for macrovascular
events and death, and 6.5% (48 mmol/mol) for
microvascular events.9 However other analyses
of observational data suggest a continuous
increase in risk of major adverse cardiovascular
disease (CVD) outcomes down to an HbA1c of
5.7% (39 mmol/mol).10
Setting clinical target recommendations should
consider both the individual and population-level
impact. The global prevalence of poor glycaemic
control is high, ranging from between 45% and
93% in one systematic review11 and another
reporting that the proportion with adequate
control was 22% since 2010.12 These estimates
are considerably lower than the World Health
Organization (WHO) goal of 80% of people with
diagnosed diabetes achieving good control of
glycaemia.13 The greatest population impact
on complications will be achieved by reducing
HbA1c from very high to moderate glycaemic
levels. Although lowering HbA1c from 7.0%
to 6.0% (53 mmol/mol to 42 mmol/mol) is
associated with a further reduction in the risk
of microvascular complications, the absolute
risk reductions become much smaller and
numbers needed to treat to benefit an individual
increase.14 Setting lower targets has implications
for the impact on health services in different
resource settings.
General glycaemic targets (e.g., HbA1c <7.0%
[<53 mmol/mol]) are proposed as guides that
are appropriate for many people but need to be
personalised, balancing reducing complications
and minimising hypoglycaemia and taking
into account a range of factors relevant to the
individual with T2DM, including comorbidities,
age, duration of diabetes, risk of hypoglycaemia,
life expectancy, individual preferences, and
available resources.14,15 Setting specific glycaemic
(and other) goals during consultations are also
helpful in improving outcomes for individuals
with diabetes.16
Advances in technology, such as continuous
glucose monitoring (CGM), have provided
more detailed information on glycaemia in
both healthy individuals without diabetes and
people with diabetes, and these data can be
used to inform glycaemic targets in people
with diabetes.17 To date, CGM has largely been
applied to people with type 1 diabetes mellitus
(T1DM) but is increasingly being considered in
T2DM in high-resource health settings.
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Approximately 80% of the global diabetes
population lives in low-income and middleincome countries (LMICs) where healthcare
resources are often limited, which impacts
access, availability, and affordability to
many established evidence-based diabetes
interventions.18 These considerations are
relevant to formulating practical clinical
recommendations and implementation
strategies for assessment of glycaemic control
in resource-limited settings.
Regular periodic measurement of HbA1c is
the gold standard for assessing longer-term
glycaemic control, and health systems should
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
GLYCAEMIC TARGETS
aim to ensure that it is available throughout
their services. However, at present it is not
available in many health services.
The 2019 periodic WHO country capacity survey
on non-communicable diseases (NCDs) of 160
countries reported that overall HbA1c testing
was generally available in only 53% of primary
care facilities in the public and private health
sectors.19 The Pan American Health Organization
separately reported that 18 of 35 countries
(51.4%) had HbA1c testing generally available
in >50% primary healthcare facilities in the
public sector.20 In these situations, other less
satisfactory methods of assessing glycaemia
(e.g., fasting, random, and postprandial glucose
measurement) remain the only option for
assessing glycaemic control. An additional
important consideration for HbA1c testing is
that the assay is not currently well-enough
standardised in many countries.21
SMBG systems have been the standard method
of self-assessment of glycaemia for many
years in well-resourced settings. However,
access to SMBG in LMICs is often hindered by
unavailability, high costs, inadequate coverage
by national health services, and even when
available, usage is compromised by poor
diabetes education. 22 Approximately 95% of
SMBG expenses is attributable to testing strips.
Consequently, SMBG is only widely used if
subsidised, but the availability of subsidised
supplies varies considerably. One survey
reported that full provision by government
of two or more blood glucose test strips per
day for children with diabetes aged less than
15 years occurred in 18 of 20 high-income
countries (HIC), five of 15 upper MIC countries,
and none of 37 LMIC and LIC countries. 23
Access in LMIC is further hindered because
out-of-pocket prices to individuals are often
much higher than prices in HIC, making SMBG
mostly unaffordable.24 An Indonesian study
reported that public sector facilities did not
supply devices for self-testing and in the private
sector, a low-income worker required nine to
12 days’ wages to purchase a meter and a
month’s supply of test strips.25
The 2023 WHO’s Essential Diagnostics List
recognised the role of blood glucose meters
and test strips for SMBG in home settings and
added a new recommendation for glucose
measurement for use in community settings
“to self-monitor type 1 and type 2 diabetes
mellitus at home”. 26 This significant step
should help increase access to SMBG in LMICs.
CGM has emerged as an option for selfmonitoring which provides more detailed
glycaemic information but is considerably more
expensive than SMBG systems. There are few
data on the global use or availability of CGM,
which is at present largely restricted to wellresourced health settings. The Indonesian
study assessed the financial impact of CGM and
reported that it would require spending 31 days’
salary of a low-income worker to purchase a
CGM reader, meaning no salary would remain
for basic daily needs. Moreover, buying a
month’s supply of CGM sensors would require
61 days’ salary, effectively making access to CGM
financially impossible for many individuals.25
EVIDENCE SUMMARY
HbA1c (glycated haemoglobin)
Measurement of HbA1c is the established
gold standard marker to assess glycaemic
control in T2DM and has prognostic value for
the development of diabetes complications
and is routinely used to measure glycaemia
in outcome-related clinical studies.27 HbA1c
integrates the mean glycaemia from the past
two to three months. It can be measured in the
laboratory or by point-of-care testing. Pointof-care technology can give HbA1c results of
sufficient quality to enable clinical decisionmaking and can be used in community and
primary care settings.28
HbA1c measurement may be affected by a
variety of genetic, haematologic, and illnessrelated factors. The most common worldwide
important factors affecting HbA1c levels are
haemoglobinopathies, certain anaemias, and
disorders associated with accelerated red cell
turnover, such as malaria.21
Serum glycated proteins (fructosamine and
glycated albumin) are an alternative to monitor
glycaemic control, especially in people with
diabetes where measurement or interpretation
of HbA1c is problematic. Fructosamine reflects
total glycated serum proteins and glycated
albumin, the proportion of total albumin that is
glycated. These measures reflect glycaemia over
the past two to four weeks and are associated
with long-term complications but lack definitive
outcome data.14

Chapter 2
HbA1c and diabetes complications
Glycaemia measured by HbA1c is associated
with increased risk of microvascular and
macrovascular complications in T2DM.29
Interventions to reduce HbA1c significantly
reduce macrovascular and microvascular
complications in the short and longer-term.1,7
One meta-analysis suggested a 15% relative risk
reduction in non-fatal myocardial infarction with
every 1.0% (11 mmol/mol) reduction in HbA1c30
and another that an absolute HbA1c reduction of
0.9% (10 mmol/mol) reduced the relative risk of
kidney events by 20% and eye events by 13%.31
HbA1c variability
Serial measurements of HbA1c can be used
to assess long-term glycaemic variability.32,33
While HbA1c variability has not been definitively
confirmed as an independent risk factor for
diabetes complications, observational studies34,35
and post-hoc analysis of diabetes outcomes
studies have reported an association between
HbA1c variability and diabetes complications,
including macrovascular events in the ADVANCE
study,36 CVD death in the EMPAREG study,37
and all-cause mortality in the ACCORD study.38
However in the VADT study, no HbA1c measures
were associated with CVD.39 High variability
in HbA1c, even among individuals with T2DM
whose average HbA1c was at target levels, has
been associated with an increased risk of CVD
complications and other adverse outcomes.40,41
HbA1c target
Setting general HbA1c targets is based on
observational studies and post-hoc analyses
of interventional RCTs showing a relationship
between HbA1c levels and macrovascular and
microvascular complications, and death in
people with T2DM. However, the nature of the
relationship has varied. The UKPDS showed a
curvilinear relationship between HbA1c and
microvascular complications. 3 The ADVANCE
trial showed a non-linear relationship between
mean HbA1c during follow-up and the risks of
macrovascular events, microvascular events,
and death with evidence of HbA1c ‘thresholds’
below 7.0% (53 mmol/mol) for macrovascular
events and death, and 6.5% (48 mmol/mol) for
microvascular events. 9 An Italian registry-based
study examined 251,339 newly diagnosed
T2DM without CVD at baseline and assessed
major CVD outcomes-based mean HbA1c. After
a mean follow-up of 4.6 years, compared with
mean HbA1c <5.7% (39 mmol/mol) during the
first year after diagnosis, CVD risk increased
progressively to 56% for individuals with
HbA1c >8.0% (>64 mmol/mol). 10
Interventional RCTs examining the effect of
intensive glycaemic control have achieved
HbA1c targets ranging from of 6.5%–7.1%
(48–54 mmol/mol).4-8 These data are the basis
for the general target of HbA1c <7.0% (<53
mmol/mol) in people with T2DM recommended
by most guidelines for minimising risk of
diabetes complications and hypoglycaemia.
This target is proposed as a guide, which is
appropriate for many people, but it is important
to consider personalising targets, based on a
range of factors relevant to the individual with
T2DM. These factors include the presence of
comorbidities, age, duration of diabetes, risk
of hypoglycaemia, life expectancy, individual
preferences, and available resources.14,15
Increasing age and declining functional and
cognitive capacity are particularly relevant when
setting less stringent goals, as treatment burden
and risk of harm outweigh potential benefits.42 It
is also important to adjust targets as required if
circumstances change.
Setting glycaemic targets should consider not
only the impact on the individual but also the
broader population-level effects. Considering the
high global levels of poor glycaemic control,11,12
the greatest population impact on complications
will be achieved by reducing HbA1c from
high to moderate glycaemic levels. Although
further lowering of HbA1c is associated with an
additional reduction in the risk of complications,
the absolute risk reductions become much
smaller, and number needed to treat to achieve
a benefit for an individual increases.14 For
example, if the annual incidence of a diabetes
complication is 5% at an HbA1c of 9.0% (75
mmol/mol) and lowering HbA1c by 1.0% (11
mmol/mol) is associated with a 50% reduction
in the annual incidence of that complication,
40 people would need to have their HbA1c
lowered from 9.0% (75 mmol/mol) to 8.0%
(64 mmol/mol) to benefit one individual. The
equivalent numbers for lowering HbA1c from
8.0% (64 mmol/mol) to 7.0% (53 mmol/mol) is
80 individuals and from 7.0% (53 mmol/mol)
to 6.5% (48 mmol/mol) is 270 individuals.
Therefore, setting low HbA1c population targets
has implications for the impact on health
services in different resource settings.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
GLYCAEMIC TARGETS
Postprandial and fasting glucose
The contribution of fasting plasma glucose
(FPG) and postprandial glucose (PPG) to overall
glycaemia in people with T2DM varies according
to HbA1c levels. The relative contribution of PPG
decreased progressively from approximately
70% in the lowest to approximately 30% in the
highest quintile of HbA1c, whereas the opposite
is observed for the relative contribution of FPG –
approximately 30% in the lowest compared with
approximately 70% in the highest quintile.43,44
A short-term study assessed the relative
contribution of controlling FPG and PPG in
people with T2DM with an HbA1c ≥7.5% (58
mmol/mol). Only 64% of people achieving
an FPG <5.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) achieved
an HbA1c <7.0% (53 mmol/mol) compared
with 94% who achieved a PPG of <7.8 mmol/L
(140 mg/dL).45 However, the contribution of
FPG to HbA1c may also be influenced by the
intervention to improve glycaemia with basal
insulin reducing the contribution of basal
hyperglycaemia to approximately 35% with
lowering mean FPG to 6.5 mmol/L (117 mg/dL)
and HbA1c to 7.0% (53 mmol/mol). 46
Postprandial and fasting glucose and
diabetes complications
Atherosclerotic disease accounts for much of
the increased mortality and morbidity associated
with T2DM, and PPG may have a direct toxic
effect on the vascular endothelium, mediated
by oxidative stress that is independent of other
CVD risk factors.47
The HEART2D RCT in people with T2DM
after acute myocardial infarction compared
controlling PPG with three premeal doses of
insulin lispro (PRANDIAL strategy) versus a basal
strategy (BASAL) of twice daily NPH insulin or
once daily insulin glargine. After 2.6 years, the
trial was stopped due to lack of efficacy.48
The Kumamoto study which used multiple
daily insulin injections to control both fasting
and post-meal glycaemia in people with T2DM,
reported a curvilinear relationship between
retinopathy and microalbuminuria with both FPG
and two-hour PPG control with no development
or progression of retinopathy or nephropathy
with FPG <6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dL) and two-hour
post-meal PG <10 mmol/L (180 mg/dL). This
suggests that both reduced PPG and reduced
FPG are strongly associated with reductions in
retinopathy and nephropathy.8
RCTs have examined CVD outcomes with
glucose-lowering medications (GLMs) which
target PPG. The NAVIGATOR trial examined the
effect of the short-acting insulin secretagogue,
nateglinide, on risk of CVD events in 9,306
people with impaired glucose tolerance. CVD
outcomes were not significantly reduced in
the participants taking nateglinide compared
with placebo after a median of five years. 49
Three studies have examined alpha glucosidase
inhibitors on CVD outcomes. The ACE (Acarbose
Cardiovascular Evaluation) study examined
the effect of acarbose in people with coronary
artery disease and impaired glucose tolerance
and failed to show a difference in outcomes
between acarbose and placebo. 50 The UKPDS
randomised 1,946 people with T2DM to
acarbose or placebo. After three years, there
was no difference in the primary aggregated
outcome or microvascular disease. 51 The ABC
study assessed the effect of voglibose on the
recurrence of myocardial infarction in people
with a previous myocardial infarction and
impaired glucose tolerance but was terminated
early after an interim analysis suggested a low
probability of a positive outcome. 52
Fasting plasma and postprandial glucose
variability
Long-term glycaemic variability can be assessed by
serial measurements of HbA1c or other measures
of glycaemia, including FPG and PPG.32,33
Post-hoc analyses of diabetes outcomes studies
have examined the relationship between FPG
variability and diabetes complications. In the
ADVANCE study intensive treatment group,
an increase in visit-to-visit variation in FPG
was associated with an increased risk of both
macrovascular and microvascular events.36 In
the DEVOTE study, higher day-to-day fasting
glycaemic variability was associated with
increased risks of severe hypoglycaemia and allcause mortality.53 In the VADT study, variability
measures of FPG were significantly associated
with CVD events after adjusting for other risk
factors. Considered separately, this relationship
was evident in the intensive treatment group
but not in the standard group.39 In the EMPAREG
study, higher FPG variability was associated
with an increased risk for CVD death in both
treatment arms.37 There are no equivalent indepth data analyses examining PPG variability.

Chapter 2
Postprandial and fasting glucose targets
The Kumamoto study showed no development
or progression of retinopathy or nephropathy
with FPG <6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dL) and two-hour
post-meal PG <10 mmol/L (180 mg/dL).8
Intervention RCTs on the effects of glycaemic
control used different glycaemic targets to
intensify treatment in the intensive treatment
groups. The UKPDS aimed for an FPG <6.0 mmol/L
(108 mg/dL);7 the ACCORD study intensified
treatment in the intensive glycaemic control group
every month if required, if HbA1c levels were ≥6.0%
(42 mmol/mol) or if >50% of premeal or post-meal
capillary glucose readings were >5.6 mmol/L (100
mg/dL) or >7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL), respectively;54
and the VADT started or adjusted insulin based
on achieving SMBG fasting glucose of 4.4 to 6.4
mmol/L (80 to 115 mg/dL).55
SMBG targets recommended by diabetes
organisations have also differed but are generally
in the same range. The IDF recommended target
levels for capillary plasma glucose levels of
<6.0 mmol/L (<108 mg/dL) before meals, and
<8.0 mmol/L (<144 mg/dL) one to two hours after
meals;42 the ADA recommends a pre-prandial
capillary plasma glucose level of 4.4–7.2 mmol/L
(80–130 mg/dL) and a peak post-prandial capillary
plasma glucose level of <10 mmol/L (180 mg/
dL);14 and the Research Society for the Study
of Diabetes in India recommends an FPG ≤6.4
mmol/L (115 mg/dL) and a postprandial glucose
≤8.9 mmol/L (160 mg/dL).56
CGM-derived glycaemic data are also useful
in informing glycaemic targets. In 153 healthy
children and adults, all without diabetes and not
overweight, CGM showed that 96% of glucose
readings were between 3.9 and 7.8 mmol/L (70
and 140 mg/dL during the day [6 am to 11:59 pm])
and 99% during the night (12 am to 5:59 am). No
glucose levels exceeded 10 mmol/L (180 mg/dL)
and 1.4% and 0.4% of readings fell below this level
during the day and night, respectively.17
Taking into account available data and in particular
aligning with CGM data, Table 2.1 shows suggested
general targets for SMBG glucose levels.
Algorithms based on similar targets have been
used to safely and successfully adjust basal
insulin in people with T2DM.57
Glycaemic profiles / other measures
of glycaemia
While measurement of HbA1c is the established
gold standard biomarker for assessing glycaemic
control, it does not provide information on shortterm glycaemic variability or hypoglycaemia. The
advent of CGM has enabled a more comprehensive
assessment and understanding of glycaemia.27
A number of glycaemic metrics are
recommended for assessment of CGM-derived
glycaemia. Short-term glycaemic variability
refers to how much glucose levels fluctuate
between peaks and nadirs within or between
the day and is usually described as the percent
coefficient of variation (%CV) of glucose withinday (%CV over 24 hours) and between-day
(%CV over several days).34 CGM-derived time in
range (TIR), time above range (TAR), and time
below range (TBR) of defined glycaemic levels
are useful measures of glycaemic status and in
clinical management. Time in a defined range is
assessed using a 14-day CGM assessment with a
CGM wear of 70% or higher.58
While there is a correlation with HbA1c, CGM
metrics provide additional information on
glycaemic status. For example, a retrospective
analysis examined the relationship between
end-of-study HbA1c levels and CGM data in 530
adults with T1DM or insulin-requiring T2DM
from four randomised trials. HbA1c was strongly
correlated with mean glucose value, TIR in the
* The mg/dL and mmol/L values are not strictly identical but have been rounded for ease of use, noting that SMBG-generated
values have an inbuilt accuracy error.
**Measure post-prandial glucose 1–2 h after beginning a meal.
SMBG, self-monitoring of blood glucose.
Measure Target*
Fasting and pre-prandial glucose 4.0–8.0 mmol/L 70–144 mg/dL
Post-prandial glucose** 4.0–8.0 mmol/L (preferable)
4.0–9.0 mmol/L (acceptable)
70–144 mg/dL (preferable)
70–160 mg/dL (acceptable)
Table 2.1 Suggested general SMBG targets
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
GLYCAEMIC TARGETS
3.9–10.0 mmol/L (70–180 mg/dL) range, and
percentage of glucose values >13.9 mmol/L
(250 mg/dL) but weakly correlated with the
percentage of glucose values <3.9 mmol/L (70
mg/dL) or <3.0 mmol/L (54 mg/dL). The median
percentage glucose <3.0 mmol/L (70 mg/dL)
was 1.2% across all HbA1c ranges while the
percentage of glucose values >13.9 mmol/L (250
mg/dL) varied from 2.5% (0.6 h/day) to 27.8%
(6.7 h/day) in the lowest and highest HbA1c
groups, respectively.59
CGM metrics and diabetes complications
CGM-derived metrics are associated with
diabetes outcomes. A review of 34 publications,
including 663 people with T1DM and 19,909
with T2DM, reported an association of higher
glycaemic variability and lower TIR with diabetes
microvascular and macrovascular complications.
Higher TIR was associated with reduced risk of
albuminuria, retinopathy, cardiovascular disease
mortality, all-cause mortality, and abnormal
carotid intima-media thickness. However, the
authors acknowledged several limitations,
including 30 of the 34 papers being crosssectional studies and most studies using only
a short period of CGM (48 to 72 hours).60
In prospective cohort studies in people with
T2DM, greater %CV was associated with
increased risk for all-cause mortality even
among people with seemingly well-controlled
diabetes (mean HbA1c of 7.3% [56 mmol/
mol]).61 Lower TIR was also associated with
increased risk of all-cause and CVD mortality
in people with T2DM. 62
A systematic review of 11 studies in 13,987
people with T2DM examined the association
between CGM-derived TIR and microvascular
complications of diabetic retinopathy (DR) (n
= 4 studies), diabetic nephropathy (DN) (n = 4
studies), and diabetic peripheral neuropathy
(DPN) (n = 7 studies). The majority of studies
(10 of the 11) were conducted in Asia. A 10%
increase in TIR was associated with a reduction
in albuminuria, severity of DR, and prevalence of
DPN and cardiac autonomic neuropathy.63
CGM metrics targets
An international consensus has proposed
targets for key glycaemic metrics as summarised
in Table 2.2.58
Table 2.2 Key metrics for assessing glycaemic status using continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
in non-pregnant adults with diabetes58
Metric Interpretation Goal
Number of days of CGM 14 days
Percentage of time CGM device is active 70% data
Coefficient of variation Percentage coefficient of variation
Intraday (i.e., within 24 h) and
Interday (i.e., over multiple days)
≤36%
Time in range 70–180 mg/dL
(3.9–10.0 mmol/L)
Percentage readings and time
in range
>70% (most adults)
>50% (older adults)
Time below range <70 mg/dL
(<3.9 mmol/L)
including readings <54 mg/dL
(<3.0 mmol/L)
Percentage readings and time
below range
<4% (most adults)
<1% (older adults)
Time below range <54 mg/dL
(<3.0 mmol/L)
Percentage readings and time
below range
<1%
Time above range >180 mg/dL
(>10.0 mmol/L)
including readings >250 mg/dL
(> 13.9 mmol/L)
Percentage readings and time
above range
<25% (most adults)
<50% (older adults)
Time above range >250 mg/dL
(> 13.9 mmol/L)
Percentage readings and time
above range
<5% (most adults)
<10% (older adults)
CGM, continuous glucose monitoring.
Chapter 2
Methods for self-assessment of glycaemia
Two approaches are available for self-assessment
of glycaemia.
Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG)
Self-monitoring of capillary (finger-stick) blood
glucose (SMBG) is a common component of
diabetes care and is commonly recommended
in people treated with a multiple-daily insulin
regimen or insulin pump, including those with
T2DM.64 Recommendations for SMBG use in less
intensively insulin-treated people with T2DM
(e.g., on basal insulin) varies, although selfmeasurement of fasting glucose appears helpful
in adjusting basal insulin dose and improving
glycaemic control.65
SMBG is generally not routinely recommended
in people with non-insulin-treated T2DM. A 2012
Cochrane review concluded that when diabetes
duration is more than one year, the overall
effect of SMBG on glycaemic control in people
with T2DM not using insulin is small up to six
months after initiation and subsides after 12
months while acknowledging that more research
is needed to explore the impact of SMBG on
hypoglycaemia and diabetes complications.66
An IDF Guideline on SMBG use in non-insulintreated T2DM suggested that in RCTs, SMBG
data are only likely to be an effective selfmanagement tool when results are reviewed
and acted on by healthcare providers and/or
people with T2DM to actively modify behaviour
and/or adjust treatment. The principal IDF
recommendation was that SMBG should be
used only when individuals with diabetes, their
caregivers, and/or their healthcare providers
have the knowledge, skills, and willingness to
incorporate SMBG monitoring and therapy
adjustment into their diabetes care plan in order
to attain agreed treatment goals and that its use
should be individualised and structured.67
RCTs have examined the effects of structured
SMBG in people with non-insulin-treated T2DM.
In a 12-month RCT, 483 poorly controlled (HbA1c
≥7.5% [58 mmol/mol]) insulin-naïve people with
T2DM were randomised to a control enhanced
usual care group or enhanced usual care
group with structured SMBG. After 12-months,
structured SMBG significantly improved
glycaemic control (HbA1c reduction 0.3% [3
mmol/mol]) and facilitated more timely and
aggressive treatment changes.68
Another 12-month RCT randomised 1,024
people with non-insulin-treated T2DM (median
baseline HbA1c 7.3% [56 mmol/mol]) to intensive
structured SMBG and an active control group.
A small but significantly greater reduction in
HbA1c (0.12% [1.3 mmol/mol]) was observed over
12 months in the structured SMBG group and
more participants achieved clinically meaningful
reductions in HbA1c (>0.3% [3 mmol/mol]).69
A recent RCT examined the impact of structured
SMBG, with or without TeleCare support, on
glycaemic control in people with non-insulintreated T2DM that was suboptimally controlled
(HbA1c ≥7.5% to ≤13% [≥58 to ≤119 mmol/mol])
and a diabetes duration of more than one year.
After 12 months, HbA1c was significantly lower
by 0.8% (8.9 mmol/mol) in both the structured
SMBG groups compared with the control group.
No additional benefit to structured SMBG was
observed with the addition of once-monthly
TeleCare support.70
SMBG protocols (intensity and frequency)
should be individualised to address each
individual’s specific educational, behavioural
and clinical requirements, specific needs, and
goals and provider requirements for data
on glycaemic patterns to monitor impact of
therapeutic decision-making.
In addition to those with insulin-treated T2DM,
SMBG may be considered for people using
GLMs who have an increased risk of
hypoglycaemia, experience hypoglycaemia
unawareness, have poor metabolic control
despite multiple medications, and/or
temporarily as an aid to education in newly
diagnosed people with T2DM.42,71
Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
Personal CGM systems have evolved rapidly
in recent years and are increasingly used to
manage diabetes. CGM systems continuously
measure interstitial glucose concentrations at
intervals of one to five minutes, which correlate
well with blood glucose levels. CGM provides
the user with immediate glucose information on
asymptomatic hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia
to make treatment decisions and health
professionals with more detailed information
on glycaemia to guide therapeutic advice. CGM
can also help to educate and support healthier
lifestyle choices.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
GLYCAEMIC TARGETS
There are currently limited data on CGM use
in people with T2DM. The IMMEDIATE study
randomised 116 people with non-insulintreated T2DM to isCGM with diabetes selfmanagement education (DSME) or DSME alone
(which included SMBG). After 16 weeks, the
isCGM and DSME group had significantly greater
mean TIR, significantly less TAR, and a greater
reduction in mean HbA1c by 0.3% (3 mmol/mol)
compared with the DSME alone arm. TBR and
hypoglycaemia were lower but not significantly
different. Glucose monitoring satisfaction was
higher among isCGM users.73
The RELIEF study was a retrospective analysis
of 74,011 people with T1DM or T2DM initiating
flash glucose monitoring identified from the
French national claims database. After 12 months,
hospitalisations for acute diabetes complications
decreased by 39% in people with T2DM
following initiation of flash glucose monitoring,
although the absolute change was small –
overall 2.67% versus 1.62%, hospitalisations
for diabetic ketoacidosis 1.70% versus. 0.82%,
severe hypoglycaemia 0.7% versus 0.62%, and
hyperglycaemia 0.12% versus 0.09%.74 These
differences persisted after two years.75
CGM use is currently not widely recommended
or adopted as part of routine care for people
with T2DM. Wider use of CGM will require
healthcare system adaptations, including
training and education of both people with
diabetes and clinicians in guiding day-to-day
management decisions. Further research is also
needed to inform optimal CGM usage guidelines
and address cost-effectiveness challenges in
people with T2DM. Although CGM technology
offers potential advantages, it is expensive
and global availability and access are limited.
Incorporating CGM use in health systems where
there are many challenges and barriers to
achieving recommended standards of diabetes
care will test policy makers and it is likely their
use will be limited to those who can privately
afford them until costs are substantially lower.
SMBG and CGM compared
CGM has the potential to provide more detailed
glycaemic information than SMBG. However,
to date, reported clinical differences in studies
comparing CGM and SMBG have been small. A
systematic review of 12 RCTs compared SMBG
and CGM in 1,248 people with T2DM. Compared
with SMBG, CGM use (rtCGM or isCGM) resulted
in small but significantly lower HbA1c (mean
difference 0.31% [3.4 mmol/mol]) with the
effect being similar in individuals using insulin
with or without oral agents or oral agents
only. A larger effect was noted with rtCGM
than isCGM. CGM was associated with a 6.4%
increased TIR, a 0.7% decreased TBR, a 5.9%
decreased TAR, and a 1.5% decreased glycaemic
variability. CGM was associated with a nonstatistically significant difference in the incidence
of severe hypoglycaemia and macrovascular
complications. No trials reported data on
microvascular complications.76
A systematic review of 26 RCTs involving 2,783
people with T2DM compared CGM (real-time/
retrospective data analysis CGM or isCGM)
versus usual care (which may have included
SMBG). Compared with usual care/SMBG, CGM
reduced HbA1c by 0.19% (2 mmol/mol) and
isCGM by 0.31% (3.4 mmol/mol) but increased
risk of mainly device-related adverse events.
Unlike CGM, isCGM was associated with
improved user satisfaction.77
More CGM data are expected to become
available as CGM is increasingly integrated into
clinical trials. A recent consensus statement
detailed how CGM might be incorporated
in diabetes RCTs, especially with new
pharmaceutical agents, and could help identify
treatment differences related to hypoglycaemia
and glycaemic metrics while minimising the
potential confounding effect of CGM use.78
Applying these consensus recommendations
in LMICs presents challenges and may require
different approaches in resource-limited settings
to ensure such technology does not widen the
resource-driven digital divide.79
There are two basic types of CGM
systems:
o Realtime CGM (rtCGM):
automatically and continuously
transmits data to the user,
provides alerts and active alarms
and glucose data in real-time to
a receiver (e.g., smart watch or
phone)
o Intermittently scanned CGM
(isCGM): provides the same type
of glucose data but requires the
user to scan the sensor to obtain
information and does not have
alerts and alarms. 72
Chapter 2
REFERENCES
1. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, et al. 10-year
follow-up of intensive glucose control in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(15):1577-1589.
2. Adler AI, Coleman RL, Leal J, et al. Post-trial
monitoring of a randomised controlled trial of
intensive glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes
extended from 10 years to 24 years (UKPDS
91). Lancet. 2024;404(10448):145-155.
3. Adler AI, Stratton IM, Neil HA, et al. Association
of systolic blood pressure with macrovascular
and microvascular complications of type 2
diabetes (UKPDS 36): prospective observational
study. BMJ. 2000;321(7258):412-419.
4. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.
Intensive blood glucose control and vascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2008;358(24):2560-2572.
5. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP , et al.
Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(24):2545-2559.
6. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al.
Glucose control and vascular complications
in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2009;360(2):129-139.
7. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group.
Intensive blood-glucose control with
sulphonylureas or insulin compared
with conventional treatment and risk of
complications in patients with type 2 diabetes
(UKPDS 33). Lancet. 1998;352(9131):837-853.
8. Ohkubo Y, Kishikawa H, Araki E, et al. Intensive
insulin therapy prevents the progression
of diabetic microvascular complications in
Japanese patients with non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus: A randomized prospective
6-year study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract.
1995;28(2):103-117.
9. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Ninomiya T, et al.
Association of HbA1c levels with vascular
complications and death in patients with type
2 diabetes: Evidence of glycaemic thresholds.
Diabetologia. 2012;55(3):636-643.
10. Russo GT, Nicolucci A, Lucisano G, et al. When
does metabolic memory start? Insights from
the Association of Medical Diabetologists
Annals Initiative on stringent HbA1c targets.
Diabetes. 2025;74(1):75-81.
11. Bin Rakhis SA, Sr., AlDuwayhis NM, Aleid N,
et al. Glycemic control for type 2 diabetes
mellitus patients: A systematic review. Cureus.
2022;14(6):e26180.
12. Shahrestanaki E, Mohammadian Khonsari N,
Seif E, et al. The worldwide trend in diabetes
awareness, treatment, and control from
1985 to 2022: A systematic review and metaanalysis of 233 population-representative
studies. Front Public Health. 2024;12:1305304.
13. World Health Organization. Guidance on
global monitoring for diabetes prevention
and control: Framework, indicators
and application. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2024. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
IGO. Available from: https://www.who.int/
publications/i/item/9789240102248 [Accessed
November, 2024].
14. American Diabetes Association Professional
Practice Committee. 6. Glycemic Goals
and Hypoglycemia: Standards of Care in
Diabetes-2025. Diabetes Care. 2025;48(Suppl
1):S128-S145.
15. Cheung NW, Conn JJ, d’Emden MC, et al.
Position statement of the Australian Diabetes
Society: Individualisation of glycated
haemoglobin targets for adults with diabetes
mellitus. Med J Aust. 2009;191(6):339-344.
16. Whitehead L, Glass C, Coppell K. The
effectiveness of goal setting on glycaemic
control for people with type 2 diabetes and
prediabetes: A systematic review and metaanalysis. J Adv Nurs. 2022;78(5):1212-1227.
17. Shah VN, DuBose SN, Li Z, et al. Continuous
glucose monitoring profiles in healthy
nondiabetic participants: A multicenter
prospective study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2019;104(10):4356-4364. Erratum in: J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2022;107(4):e1775-e1776.
18. International Diabetes Federation (IDF). IDF
Diabetes Atlas, 11th edition. Brussels, Belgium:
International Diabetes Federation, 2025.
Available from: https://diabetesatlas.org.
19. World Health Organization. Assessing national
capacity for the prevention and control of
noncommunicable diseases: Report of the
2019 global survey. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2020. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
IGO. Available from: https://www.who.int/
publications/i/item/9789240002319 [Accessed
November 2024].
20. Pan American Health Organization (PAHO).
Country snapshot of diabetes prevention and
control in the Americas. Information kit (folder,
banner, brochure). PAHO; 2021. Available from:
https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/55326
[Accessed November 2024].
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
GLYCAEMIC TARGETS
21. World Health Organization. Use of Glycated
Haemoglobin (HbA1c) in the Diagnosis of
Diabetes Mellitus: Abbreviated Report of a
WHO Consultation. Geneva: World Health
Organization: 2011. Available from: https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK304267/
[Accessed November 2024].
22. Klatman EL, Jenkins AJ, Ahmedani MY, et al.
Blood glucose meters and test strips: Global
market and challenges to access in lowresource settings. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2019;7(2):150-160.
23. Ogle GD, Middlehurst AC, Silink M. The IDF
Life for a Child Program Index of diabetes
care for children and youth. Pediatr Diabetes.
2016;17(5):374-384.
24. Health Action International (HAI). Market
report of diabetes self-monitoring devices
in LMICs - October 2021. Developed by
the Clinton Health Access Initiative (CHAI).
Available from: https://haiweb.org/wpcontent/uploads/2021/09/Market-Report_Selfmonitoring-Devices-in-LMICs.pdf [Accessed
November 2024].
25. Ramadaniati HU, Anggriani Y, Lepeska M,
et al. Availability, price and affordability of
insulin, delivery devices and self-monitoring
blood glucose devices in Indonesia. PLoS One.
2024;19(10):e0309350.
26. World Health Organization. The selection
and use of essential in vitro diagnostics:
Report of the fourth meeting of the WHO
Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on In Vitro
Diagnostics, 2022 (including the fourth WHO
model list of essential in vitro diagnostics).
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023
(WHO Technical Report Series, No. 1053).
Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0.IGO. Available
from: https://www.who.int/publications/i/
item/9789240081093 [Accessed January 2024].
27. Ceriello A, Prattichizzo F, Phillip M, et al.
Glycaemic management in diabetes: Old and
new approaches. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2022;10(1):75-84.
28. Gourlay A, Sutherland C, Radley A. point-ofcare testing of HbA(1)c levels in community
settings for people with established diabetes
or people at risk of developing diabetes: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Prim
Care Diabetes. 2024;18(1):7-16.
29. Stratton IM, Adler AI, Neil HA, et al. Association
of glycaemia with macrovascular and
microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes
(UKPDS 35): Prospective observational study.
BMJ. 2000;321(7258):405-412.
30. Turnbull FM, Abraira C, Anderson RJ, et al.
Intensive glucose control and macrovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia.
2009;52(11):2288-2298.
31. Zoungas S, Arima H, Gerstein HC, et al. Effects
of intensive glucose control on microvascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes: A
meta-analysis of individual participant data
from randomised controlled trials. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(6):431-437.
32. Monnier L, Colette C, Owens D. Glucose
variability and diabetes complications: Risk
factor or biomarker? Can we disentangle
the “Gordian Knot”? Diabetes Metab.
2021;47(3):101225.
33. Monnier L, Colette C, Wojtusciszyn A, et al.
Toward defining the threshold between
low and high glucose variability in diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2017;40(7):832-838.
34. Ceriello A, Monnier L, Owens D. Glycaemic
variability in diabetes: Clinical and therapeutic
implications. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2019;7(3):221-230.
35. Li S, Nemeth I, Donnelly L, et al. Visit-tovisit HbA(1c) variability is associated with
cardiovascular disease and microvascular
complications in patients with newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2020;43(2):426-432.
36. Hirakawa Y, Arima H, Zoungas S, et al. Impact
of visit-to-visit glycemic variability on the risks
of macrovascular and microvascular events
and all-cause mortality in type 2 diabetes: The
ADVANCE trial. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(8):23592365.
37. Ceriello A, Ofstad AP , Zwiener I, et al.
Empagliflozin reduced long-term HbA1c
variability and cardiovascular death: Insights
from the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial. Cardiovasc
Diabetol. 2020;19(1):176.
38. Sheng CS, Tian J, Miao Y, et al. Prognostic
significance of long-term HbA(1c) variability
for all-cause mortality in the ACCORD trial.
Diabetes Care. 2020;43(6):1185-1190.
39. Zhou JJ, Schwenke DC, Bahn G, et al. Glycemic
variation and cardiovascular risk in the
Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial. Diabetes Care.
2018;41(10):2187-2194.
40. Sato M, Inaishi J, Saisho Y, et al. Association
of visit-to-visit glycemic variability with risk of
cardiovascular diseases in high-risk Japanese
patients with type 2 diabetes: A subanalysis
of the EMPATHY trial. J Diabetes Investig.
2021;12(12):2190-2196.
Chapter 2
41. Ceriello A, Lucisano G, Prattichizzo F, et al.
HbA1c variability predicts cardiovascular
complications in type 2 diabetes regardless of
being at glycemic target. Cardiovasc Diabetol.
2022;21(1):13.
42. International Diabetes Federation. Managing
older people with type 2 diabetes - Global
guideline. 2013. Available from: https://idf.org/
media/uploads/2023/05/attachments-48.pdf
[Accessed November 2024].
43. Monnier L, Lapinski H, Colette C. Contributions
of fasting and postprandial plasma
glucose increments to the overall diurnal
hyperglycemia of type 2 diabetic patients:
Variations with increasing levels of HbA(1c).
Diabetes Care. 2003;26(3):881-885.
44. International Diabetes Federation.
Guideline for management of postmeal
glucose in diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract.
2014;103(2):256-268.
45. Woerle HJ, Neumann C, Zschau S, et al. Impact
of fasting and postprandial glycemia on
overall glycemic control in type 2 diabetes.
Importance of postprandial glycemia to
achieve target HbA1c levels. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract. 2007;77(2):280-285.
46. Riddle M, Umpierrez G, DiGenio A, et al.
Contributions of basal and postprandial
hyperglycemia over a wide range of
A1C levels before and after treatment
intensification in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Care. 2011;34(12):2508-2514.
47. Ceriello A, Hanefeld M, Leiter L, et al.
Postprandial glucose regulation and
diabetic complications. Arch Intern Med.
2004;164(19):2090-2095.
48. Raz I, Wilson PW, Strojek K, et al. Effects
of prandial versus fasting glycemia
on cardiovascular outcomes in type 2
diabetes: The HEART2D trial. Diabetes Care.
2009;32(3):381-386.
49. Holman RR, Haffner SM, McMurray JJ, et
al. Effect of nateglinide on the incidence of
diabetes and cardiovascular events. N Engl J
Med. 2010;362(16):1463-1476.
50. Holman RR, Coleman RL, Chan JCN, et al.
Effects of acarbose on cardiovascular and
diabetes outcomes in patients with coronary
heart disease and impaired glucose tolerance
(ACE): A randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2017;5(11):877-886.
51. Holman RR, Cull CA, Turner RC. A randomized
double-blind trial of acarbose in type 2
diabetes shows improved glycemic control
over 3 years (U.K. Prospective Diabetes Study
44). Diabetes Care. 1999;22(6):960-964.
52. Asakura M, Kim J, Asanuma H, et al. Does
treatment of impaired glucose tolerance
improve cardiovascular outcomes in
patients with previous myocardial infarction?
Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2017;31(4):401-411.
53. Zinman B, Marso SP , Poulter NR, et al. Day-today fasting glycaemic variability in DEVOTE:
Associations with severe hypoglycaemia
and cardiovascular outcomes (DEVOTE 2).
Diabetologia. 2018;61(1):48-57.
54. Gerstein HC, Riddle MC, Kendall DM, et
al. Glycemia treatment strategies in the
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in
Diabetes (ACCORD) trial. Am J Cardiol.
2007;99(12a):34i-43i.
55. Abraira C, Duckworth W, McCarren M, et al.
Design of the cooperative study on glycemic
control and complications in diabetes mellitus
type 2: Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial. J
Diabetes Complications. 2003;17(6):314-322.
56. Rao PV, Makkar BM, Kumar A, et al. RSSDI
consensus on self-monitoring of blood glucose
in types 1 and 2 diabetes mellitus in India. Int J
Diabetes Dev Ctries. 2018;38(3):260-279.
57. Johnson ML, Bergenstal RM, Levy BL, et al.
A safe and simple algorithm for adding and
adjusting mealtime insulin to basal-only
therapy. Clin Diabetes. 2022;40(4):489-497.
58. Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM,
et al. Clinical targets for continuous
glucose monitoring data interpretation:
Recommendations from the International
Consensus on Time in Range. Diabetes Care.
2019;42(8):1593-1603.
59. Hirsch IB, Welsh JB, Calhoun P , et al.
Associations between HbA(1c) and continuous
glucose monitoring-derived glycaemic
variables. Diabet Med. 2019;36(12):1637-1642.
60. Yapanis M, James S, Craig ME, et aI.
Complications of diabetes and metrics
of glycemic management derived from
continuous glucose monitoring. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2022;107(6):e2221-e2236.
61. Mo Y, Wang C, Lu J, et al. Impact of shortterm glycemic variability on risk of all-cause
mortality in type 2 diabetes patients with
well-controlled glucose profile by continuous
glucose monitoring: A prospective cohort
study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2022;189:109940.
62. Lu J, Wang C, Shen Y, et al. Time in range
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
GLYCAEMIC TARGETS
in relation to all-cause and cardiovascular
mortality in patients with type 2 diabetes:
A prospective cohort study. Diabetes Care.
2021;44(2):549-555.
63. Raj R, Mishra R, Jha N, et al. Time in range, as
measured by continuous glucose monitor, as
a predictor of microvascular complications in
type 2 diabetes: A systematic review. BMJ Open
Diabetes Res Care. 2022;10(1):e002573.
64. American Diabetes Association Professional
Practice Committee. 7. Diabetes technology:
Standards of care in diabetes-2025. Diabetes
Care. 2025;48(Suppl 1):S146-S166.
65. Garber AJ. Treat-to-target trials: Uses,
interpretation and review of concepts. Diabetes
Obes Metab. 2014;16(3):193-205.
66. Malanda UL, Welschen LM, Riphagen, II, et al.
Self-monitoring of blood glucose in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus who are not
using insulin. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2012;1:CD005060.
67. International Diabetes Federation. Guideline
on self-monitoring of blood glucose in noninsulin treated type 2 diabetes. 2013. Available
from: https://d-net.idf.org/en/library/190self-monitoring-of-blood-glucose-in-noninsulin-treated-type-2-diabetes.html [Accessed
November 2024].
68. Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Schikman CH, et al.
Structured self-monitoring of blood glucose
significantly reduces A1C levels in poorly
controlled, noninsulin-treated type 2 diabetes:
Results from the Structured Testing Program
study. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(2):262-267.
69. Bosi E, Scavini M, Ceriello A, et al. Intensive
structured self-monitoring of blood glucose
and glycemic control in noninsulin-treated
type 2 diabetes: The PRISMA randomized trial.
Diabetes Care. 2013;36(10):2887-2894.
70. Parsons SN, Luzio SD, Harvey JN, et al. Effect of
structured self-monitoring of blood glucose,
with and without additional TeleCare support,
on overall glycaemic control in non-insulin
treated Type 2 diabetes: The SMBG Study, a
12-month randomized controlled trial. Diabet
Med. 2019;36(5):578-590.
71. National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE). Type 2 diabetes in adults:
Management. NICE guideline [NG28].
Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ng28 [Accessed November 2024].
72. Edelman SV, Argento NB, Pettus J, et al. Clinical
implications of real-time and intermittently
scanned continuous glucose monitoring.
Diabetes Care. 2018;41(11):2265-2274.
73. Aronson R, Brown RE, Chu L, et al. IMpact
of flash glucose Monitoring in pEople with
type 2 Diabetes Inadequately controlled with
non-insulin Antihyperglycaemic ThErapy
(IMMEDIATE): A randomized controlled trial.
Diabetes Obes Metab. 2023;25(4):1024-1031.
74. Roussel R, Riveline JP , Vicaut E, et al. Important
drop in rate of acute diabetes complications
in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes
after initiation of flash glucose monitoring
in France: The RELIEF Study. Diabetes Care.
2021;44(6):1368-1376.
75. Riveline JP , Roussel R, Vicaut E, et al. Reduced
rate of acute diabetes events with flash
glucose monitoring is sustained for 2 years
after initiation: Extended outcomes from
the RELIEF Study. Diabetes Technol Ther.
2022;24(9):611-618.
76. Jancev M, Vissers T, Visseren FLJ, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring in adults with
type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Diabetologia. 2024;67(5):798-810.
77. Seidu S, Kunutsor SK, Ajjan RA, et al. Efficacy
and safety of continuous glucose monitoring
and intermittently scanned continuous
glucose monitoring in patients with type
2 diabetes: A systematic review and metaanalysis of interventional evidence. Diabetes
Care. 2024;47(1):169-179.
78. Battelino T, Alexander CM, Amiel SA, et al.
Continuous glucose monitoring and metrics
for clinical trials: An international consensus
statement. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2023;11(1):42-57.
79. Gupta Y, Goyal A, Tandon N. Implications of
technology guidelines for low-income and
middle-income countries. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2023;11(3):155.
Chapter 2
Blood Glucose-Lowering
Therapies – Non-Insulin
Options for Type 2 Diabetes
Chapter 3
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES – NON-INSULIN
Chapter 3
RECOMMENDATIONS
Optimal Care Basic Care
At diagnosis
No complications or
low cardio-renal risk
In obese persons
• Lifestyle modification
• Metformin
• Combination therapy is an option
• Consider metformin and GLP-1RA
• Lifestyle modification
• Metformin
• Consider metformin and SGLT2i*
Risk of or with
cardio-renal
complications
• Lifestyle modification
• Metformin and SGLT2i or
GLP-1RA
(SGLT2i preferred in HF)
• Lifestyle modification
• Metformin and SGLT2i*
On therapy and not at glycaemic target
No complications or
low cardio-renal risk
• Reinforce lifestyle modification
If only on metformin
• Add SGLT2i
In obese persons
• Add GLP-1RA
If on combination therapy
• Add an SGLT2i or GLP-1RA
• If already taking an SGLT2i or
GLP-1RA, add an agent from
another BGL therapy
• Reinforce lifestyle modification
If only on metformin
• Add SGLT2i* or any available
BGL therapy
If on combination therapy
• Add SGLT2i* or any available
BGL therapy
Risk of or with
cardio-renal
complications
• Reinforce lifestyle modification
If only on metformin:
• Add SGLT2i or GLP-1RA
In obese persons
• Add GLP-1RA
If on combination therapy
• Add an SGLT2i or GLP-1RA
• If already taking an SGLT2i or
GLP-1RA, add an agent from
another BGL therapy
• Reinforce lifestyle modification
If only on metformin:
• Add SGLT2i* or any available
BGL therapy
If on combination therapy
• Add SGLT2i* or any available
BGL therapy
* SGLT2 inhibitors are increasingly available in several low- and middle-income countries at generally affordable cost.
BGL, blood glucose- lowering; GLP-1RA, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; HF, heart failure; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose
cotransporter-2 inhibitor.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES – NON-INSULIN
o Globally, poor glycaemic control is common in people with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
and improving glycaemic control remains an unmet need and a key diabetes care priority.
o Early and intensive glycaemic control in T2DM not only reduces micro- and
macrovascular complications but also has a legacy effect that lower risk for decades.
o Intensive multifactorial risk management, including blood glucose, blood pressure, and
lipids, decreases long-term cardio-renal events and overall mortality.
o Recent cardiovascular outcome trials with sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists have demonstrated
significant cardio-renal protection, prompting debate about balancing the focus on
glycaemic control and organ protection, particularly for individuals at low risk of cardiorenal complications.
o Global availability, access, and affordability of blood glucose-lowering therapies (BGL)
vary widely and impact treatment options in lower resource settings.
o The majority of cardio-renal outcome studies have added trial therapies to usual
care with placebo as the comparator and outcome data from head-to-head studies
comparing blood glucose-lowering therapies are limited.
o Initiating therapy should be personalised based on individual characteristics,
comorbidities, and shared decision-making, with lifestyle interventions (e.g., selfmanagement education, nutrition, and exercise) as essential components.
o Metformin remains the recommended first-line monotherapy due to its global
availability, efficacy, safety profile, low hypoglycaemia risk, and cost-effectiveness, along
with demonstrated long-term cardiovascular benefits.
o Emerging data support the early use of SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists,
usually added to metformin, to mitigate the adverse consequences of poor glycaemic
control and improve cardio-renal outcomes, although evidence supporting their role as
first-line monotherapy is limited.
o Initial combination therapy may increase durability of glycaemic control compared with
stepwise addition of BGL therapies.
o Timely treatment intensification is crucial to overcome clinical inertia, while
deintensification should be considered in individuals at or near glycaemic targets,
especially in the elderly and those prone to hypoglycaemia.
o Therapy choices should factor in management of coexisting conditions such as
cardio-renal complications, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease,
and weight control.
KEY POINTS
Chapter 3
BACKGROUND
Early and intensive glycaemic control
Evidence strongly suggests that good glycaemic
control is the key to decreasing the risk of both
micro- and macrovascular complications in type
2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).1 Furthermore, early
and intensive glycaemic control has a legacy
effect in decreasing the risk of developing
complications even after 24 years, compared
to non-intensive glycaemic control.2 This legacy
effect underscores the long-term benefits of
early and intensive glycaemic control in reducing
cardiovascular and kidney disease events and
all-cause mortality.
Globally, poor glycaemic control in people with
T2DM is common, being observed in 45%–93%
of individuals, with considerable inter- and
within-country variations.3 Consequently,
improving glycaemic control remains an
unmet need and a key diabetes care priority.
In addition, intensive multifactorial risk factor
management (blood glucose, blood pressure,
lipids) reduces microvascular complications and
long-term cardio-renal events and mortality.4,5
Cardio-renal protection
Several sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitor and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)
receptor agonist cardiovascular outcome trial
(CVOT) randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have
demonstrated cardio-renal protection with
benefits in cardiovascular disease (CVD), heart
failure, and renal outcomes. These findings have
stimulated a paradigm shift to focusing on organ
protection with less emphasis on glycaemic
control. As a result, there is debate about the
relative importance of glycaemic control in the
management of T2DM and potential unintended
consequences for the many individuals with
poor glycaemic control without or at low risk
of cardio-renal complications.6 Separating an
effect of intensive glucose control and the
cardio-renal protection of newer blood glucoselowering (BGL) medications is limited by a
lack of dedicated RCTs. CVOT RCTs have been
mainly performed in people with T2DM with
prior cardiovascular and/or kidney disease
or multiple risk factors, and the majority of
participants in the CVOTs of SGLT2 inhibitors
and GLP-1 receptor agonists were treated
with conventional BGL medications and renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system inhibitors,
statins, and antiplatelet therapy. Of note, these
newer agents have no demonstrated benefits
on diabetes microvascular complications of
retinopathy and neuropathy, which are known to
be influenced by improved glycaemic control.
Achieving glycaemic control is a universally
accepted goal. Complimenting this with specific
cardio-renal protection interventions in a lowresource health environment will be determined
by availability, accessibility, and affordability of
newer BGL medications.
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
A number of classes of non-insulin BGL therapies
are available and their attributes have been
reviewed and summarised elsewhere.7,8
The global availability, access to, and
affordability of BGL therapies vary widely. The
World Health Organization (WHO) periodically
publishes an Essential Medicines List (EML).9
This includes a core list of minimum medicine
needs for a basic healthcare system of the most
efficacious, safe, and cost-effective medicines for
priority conditions, including diabetes, selected
on the basis of current and estimated future
public health relevance, and potential for safe
and cost-effective treatment. The current list for
diabetes is shown in Table 3.1.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES – NON-INSULIN
The WHO EML is reviewed and updated every
two years, and in 2023, SGLT2 inhibitors were
included. In some low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs), generic SGLT2 inhibitors are
becoming available at affordable prices.
The WHO EML serves as a basis for National
EMLs (NEML) with approximately 70% of the
194 WHO member states having NEMLs. The
congruence of NEMLs with the WHO EML
varies considerably across conditions, with the
median of listed diabetes drugs being 0.60.10
In another study, the total number of diabetes
medicines listed on NEMLs ranged from 0 to 16
across 127 countries (median: 4; interquartile
range: 3–6) and diabetes health outcome scores
were associated with the number of diabetes
medicines on NEMLs.11
As reviewed in Chapter 2, assessment of
glycaemic control is important in monitoring
the effectiveness of BGL medications. Global
consensus is that measurement of glycated
haemoglobin (HbA1c) should be used to
initiate and modify BGL therapy. Other tests,
such as fasting and postprandial self-blood
glucose, glucose variability, and time in range
measurements, provide additional information
about glycaemic status and underlying
pathophysiology, and influence therapeutic
choice.12 Unfortunately, HbA1c measurement
and other technologies are not available in
many health facilities throughout the world and
therefore healthcare providers should remain
flexible in using alternative methods for glucose
monitoring and treatment planning as per local
resources and capabilities.
EVIDENCE SUMMARY
Initiating therapy
Determining the optimal timing for initiating
and choosing BGL therapy in drug-naïve
individuals with unsatisfactory diabetes control
requires assessment of individual characteristics
(advanced age), personal circumstances
(financial constraints, living alone or in a care
facility), glycaemic targets, and the presence
of comorbidities and cardio-renal disease or
risk. Shared decision-making should include
an evaluation of benefits and risks such as
hypoglycaemia and is a continuous process.13
Lifestyle intervention
Lifestyle interventions, including diabetes
self-management education, medical nutrition
therapy, and regular physical activity, play a
pivotal role in managing T2DM regardless of
BGL medication,14 and contribute to improved
outcomes, including quality of life,15 reduced
all-cause mortality,16 hospitalisation, and
lower healthcare costs,17,18 emphasising their
importance in initial management. Individuals
should be encouraged to aim for specific lifestyle
goals, such as at least 150 minutes of moderate
exercise per week and a reduction in excess body
weight of 5%–10%. Weight loss can improve
Table 3.1 World Health Organization Model List of Essential Medicines – 23rd List (2023)
Medicines for Diabetes
Oral hypoglycaemic agents
Empagliflozin
Therapeutic alternatives:
• canagliflozin
• dapagliflozin
Tablet: 10 mg; 25 mg.
Gliclazide*
Therapeutic alternatives:
• 4th level ATC chemical subgroup (A10BB
Sulfonylureas)
Solid oral dosage form: (controlled-release
tablets)
30 mg; 60 mg; 80 mg.
*glibenclamide not suitable above 60 years.
Metformin Tablet: 500 mg (hydrochloride).
ATC, Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical.
Adapted from World Health Organization, 20239
Chapter 3
glycaemic control, induce diabetes remission,
and lead to improvements in various metabolic
and cardiovascular risk factors (see Chapter 5).
Globally, there is considerable variation in local
diets, influenced by tradition, local customs,
religion, and the availability and affordability of
food. Consequently, the applicability of nutritionrelated studies to a particular environment will
vary, although some overarching observations are
relevant. Most intervention studies of different
diets and dietary components associated with
benefits in diabetes control have been short-term.
Beneficial effects diminish over time and are not
consistently maintained in studies with follow-up
periods longer than 12 months.
Carbohydrate in foods comprises the major
nutrient component in most diets worldwide.
Many less economically secure communities
rely on carbohydrate foods for their sustenance.
Wealthier nations have selected types of
carbohydrate foods that have contributed to
obesity, diabetes, and ill health. A systematic
review and meta-analysis of RCTs on varying
carbohydrate quantity reported a dosedependent effect. Each 10% decrease in
carbohydrate intake reduced HbA1c by 0.2%
(3 mmol/mol) after six months, compared to
a carbohydrate intake between 55%–65%.19
A recent RCT compared a healthy lowcarbohydrate diet with a usual diet in adults with
HbA1c between 6.0%–6.9% (42–52 mmol/mol)
who were not taking BGL medications. After six
months, the low-carbohydrate diet group had a
significantly lower HbA1c (0.23% [3 mmol/mol])
compared to the usual diet group.20
Diets that improve carbohydrate quality by using
low glycaemic index foods may help improve
glycaemic control, with a systematic review
reporting a statistically significant reduction of
HbA1c of 0.19% (2 mmol/mol) compared with a
range of other diets.21 The more restrictive vegan
diet (low-fat, excluding all animal-based products)
demonstrated an HbA1c reduction of 0.41% (4
mol/mol) compared with a conventional diet.22
The diets to be advised for the management
of T2DM must be culturally and economically
appropriate. Dietitians with local experience must
be part of the team. Foods such as legumes, fresh
fruit and non-starchy vegetables, nuts and seeds
in acceptable form should be encouraged, and
advice against consumption of soft drinks and
sugars should be given, together with reducing
amounts of starchy foods, especially those that
are highly processed. Such diets will not only
benefit people with T2DM but human health
globally and reduce the environmental impact of
human food production.
Understanding how nutrition therapy and
pharmacotherapy interact in real-world
diabetes management remains a challenge.
The lack of clear evidence of complementarity
between diet quality and the intensity of BGL
medications highlights the challenge and
need for better integration between diet and
pharmacologic approaches. 23
First-line monotherapy
Metformin
When pharmacologic intervention is necessary,
metformin is traditionally recommended as
first-line monotherapy based on its blood
glucose-lowering efficacy, low hypoglycaemia
risk, weight neutrality with the potential for
modest weight loss, good safety profile, general
availability, and low cost.8,13 In addition, there is
a long experience with its use, and long-term
CVD benefits were observed in the UKDPS.24
Metformin’s safety profile extends to individuals
with reduced estimated glomerular filtration
rates (eGFR), supporting its use in those with an
eGFR ≥30 mL/min/1.73 m².
Other therapies
Other therapies are also effective as first-line
treatments, with some well-recognised class
effect differences. Reductions in HbA1c were
similar across monotherapies except that
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) inhibitors had
smaller effects. Body weight was reduced or
maintained with metformin, DPP4 inhibitors,
GLP-1 receptor agonists, and SGLT2 inhibitors
and increased with sulfonylureas and
thiazolidinediones. Hypoglycaemia was more
frequent with sulfonylureas. Gastrointestinal
adverse events were highest with metformin
and GLP-1 receptor agonists. Genital mycotic
infections were increased with SGLT2 inhibitors.25
Within each class, there are also differences
between individual agents. Of particular
relevance to Basic Care Recommendations
where the range and choice of therapeutic
options are limited due to access, availability,
and affordability, there are well-documented
differences in sulfonylureas with regard to
hypoglycaemia risk and impact on weight.26
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES – NON-INSULIN
SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists
T2DM significantly increases the risk of cardiorenal complications. The findings of cardio-renal
protection in recent RCTs with SGLT2 inhibitors
and GLP-1 receptor agonists have led to
guidelines and consensus statements proposing
the use of these agents as first-line therapy in
individuals with or at high risk of cardio-renal
disease, either in combination with metformin13
or as monotherapy.27
At present, the evidence supporting these agents
as first-line monotherapy is inconclusive.28 All
CVOT RCTs demonstrating cardio-renal protection
have added the study medication to existing
therapy of study participants, with the majority
taking metformin. Post-hoc analyses have shown
no evidence of heterogeneity in the CV efficacy
of the GLP-1 receptor agonist liraglutide based
on background metformin29 or with SGLT2
inhibitors for reductions in cardiovascular, kidney,
and mortality outcomes regardless of whether
individuals were receiving or not receiving
metformin. However, it should be noted that
baseline metformin users had an approximately
30% lower risk of the primary outcome than
metformin non-users.30 A meta-analysis of newer
BGL medications in metformin-naïve people with
T2DM reported beneficial effect of GLP-1 receptor
agonists and SGLT2 inhibitors.31
A recent observational registry-based study
using the AMD Annals Initiative assessed the
association between the early introduction of
SGLT2 inhibitors and consequences of poor
glycaemic control in newly diagnosed individuals
with T2DM without CVD.32 The early introduction
of SGLT2 inhibitors in people with T2DM, 90% of
whom were also taking metformin, eliminated
the association between poor glycaemic control
in the first two years after T2DM diagnosis
and later CVD events, suggesting that SGLT2
inhibitors may attenuate the consequences of
poor glycaemic control after T2DM diagnosis.
To date, there have not been any direct
comparisons of metformin versus newer
agents on diabetes-related outcomes as firstline monotherapy. A registry-based randomised
trial (SMARTEST) is underway to directly assess
dapagliflozin versus metformin on a primary
composite endpoint of macro- or microvascular
events in approximately 4,300 participants
with early T2DM.33
Combination therapy
There are numerous combinations of non-insulin
BGL therapies, and it is beyond the scope of this
document to review all potential combinations.
This section highlights some aspects of
combination therapy.
Combination first-line therapy
Metformin serves as the cornerstone for
combination therapy. While conventional
approaches have favoured stepwise addition
of therapy, some individuals may require
combination therapy (two BGL medications) to
achieve glycaemic control early in the course
of their diabetes. Dual initial oral therapy
can be considered in those with HbA1c levels
exceeding 9%–10% (75–86 mmol/mol) without
symptoms. In some cases, insulin may be
required as part of initial pharmacotherapy,
particularly in those with clear symptoms and/
or signs of significant hyperglycaemia.7,34 In
these situations, combination therapy may be
temporary. A decision to reduce hyperglycaemia
quickly through combination therapy should
also consider potential detrimental effects such
as the risk of retinopathy progression.35 The
primary focus should not be rapid reduction but
rather reaching glycaemic goals and maintaining
them over time.
Initial combination therapy may increase
durability of glycaemic control compared with
stepwise addition of BGL therapies. The VERIFY
trial demonstrated the superiority of initial
combination therapy over sequential addition
in slowing the decline of glycaemic control.
Participants with T2DM diagnosed within
two years prior to enrolment with HbA1c of
6.5%–7.5% (48–58 mmol/mol) received either
combination treatment with metformin and
vildagliptin or initial metformin monotherapy
with the subsequent addition of vildagliptin
if required to improve diabetes control. The
endpoint, time from randomisation to initial
treatment failure (HbA1c ≥7.0% [53 mmol/mol]),
occurred in 43.6% in the combination treatment
group and 62.1% in the monotherapy group.36
The VERIFY study was not designed or powered
to assess the effect of combination treatment
on cardiovascular outcomes.
The effect of initial triple therapy on long-term
glycaemic control has also been studied. In
the EDICT study, drug-naïve individuals with
new-onset T2DM were randomly assigned to
receive either 1) combination therapy with
Chapter 3
metformin, pioglitazone, and exenatide (triple
therapy) or 2) sequential addition of metformin
followed by glipizide and insulin (conventional
therapy) aiming to maintain HbA1c below 6.5%
(48 mmol/mol). After three years, HbA1c was
significantly lower with initial triple therapy
compared with conventional therapy (6.4% [47
mmol/mol] versus 6.9% [52 mmol/mol]).37 The
TRIPLE-AXEL study randomised individuals with
drug-naïve T2DM to triple combination therapy
with metformin, dapagliflozin, and saxagliptin or
conventional stepwise add-on therapy (initiated
with metformin, followed by glimepiride and
sitagliptin). The primary outcome, the proportion
who achieved an HbA1c <6.5% (48 mmol/mol)
without hypoglycaemia, weight gain of 5% or
higher, or discontinuation of drugs because of
adverse events at 104 weeks, was achieved in
39.0% and 17.1%, respectively, although HbA1c
reduction from baseline was similar in both
groups.38 However, in both triple therapy studies,
the treatment regimens differed between the
two groups.
There are no dedicated outcome studies
comparing treatment initiation with
combinations of BGL therapies.
Combination SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1
receptor agonists
Some guidance suggests combining SGLT2
inhibitor and GLP-1 receptor agonist therapies.
However, this combination has not been
evaluated in an outcome RCT and the results
of analyses of administrative datasets are not
convincing. Nested case-control studies of
individuals with T2DM in England and Wales
of primary care data from the Clinical Practice
Research Datalink and Secure Anonymised
Information Linkage Databank reported on the
association of SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1 receptor
agonists, or their combination regimens on
major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular
events (MACCE) and heart failure (HF) compared
to other BGL regimens. Use of SGLT2 inhibitor
was associated with an 18% lower odds of
MACCE, and the odds of HF were 51% lower
with SGLT2 inhibitors and 18% lower with GLP-1
receptor agonists, but the combination was not
superior to either agent used alone.39
The addition of either SGLT2 inhibitors or
sulfonylureas to baseline GLP-1 receptor
agonists on CVD outcomes was explored in an
analysis of three US claims datasets in 12,584
people with T2DM and showed significant
reductions in the risk of MACCE and HF
hospitalisations in the SGLT2 inhibitor/GLP1 receptor agonist combination compared
to the sulfonylureas/GLP-1 receptor agonist
combination.40 However, the magnitude of
the CVD risk reduction was comparable to the
benefit seen in CVOTs of SGLT2 inhibitors versus
placebo, where baseline GLP-1 receptor agonist
use was minimal.
Treatment intensification,
deintensification, or modification
Early intervention is required in people with T2DM
not reaching or maintaining their individualised
glycaemia targets. Clinical inertia is one of the
most difficult barriers to overcome in clinical
practice and has a dramatic impact on the
prognosis of complications and quality of life.41,42
Timely treatment intensification with additional
BGL therapy when required is crucial to avoid
clinical inertia. Failure to reach or maintain
glycaemic targets should be a trigger to consider
a change in therapy. The presence or emergence
of comorbidities also influence this decision. Any
change or intensification of therapy should be
reassessed within three months.
Meta-analyses suggest that any drug added to
an initial therapy, particularly with metformin,
can improve glycaemic control.43,44
Conversely, deintensification of therapy should
be considered in people at or near glycaemic
target who are prone to hypoglycaemia,
especially the elderly.45 The use of sulfonylureas
(and glinides) should be minimised where
alternatives are available and affordable, or dose
should be reduced.46
Achieving glycaemic targets does not mandate
treatment deintensification, especially with
newer agents such as GLP-1 receptor agonists
and SGLT2 inhibitors, which not only manage
hyperglycaemia but also provide additional
cardio-renal benefits in high-risk individuals
without increasing hypoglycaemia, as well as
supporting weight control.
Managing coexisting cardio-renal complications,
metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic
liver disease (MASLD), and weight control are
addressed in specific chapters. In brief, therapies
with demonstrated benefits in managing these
comorbidities should be preferred considering
that they are also efficacious in controlling
hyperglycaemia, if they are available, affordable,
and accessible.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES – NON-INSULIN
REFERENCES
1. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, et al. 10-year
follow-up of intensive glucose control in type
2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(15):15771589.
2. Adler AI, Coleman RL, Leal J, et al. Post-trial
monitoring of a randomised controlled trial of
intensive glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes
extended from 10 years to 24 years (UKPDS
91). Lancet. 2024;404(10448):145-155.
3. Bin Rakhis SA, Sr., AlDuwayhis NM, Aleid N,
et al. Glycemic control for type 2 diabetes
mellitus patients: A systematic review. Cureus.
2022;14(6):e26180.
4. Gaede P , Vedel P , Parving HH, et al.
Intensified multifactorial intervention
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
and microalbuminuria: The Steno type 2
randomised study. Lancet. 1999;353(9153):617622.
5. Gaede P , Vedel P , Larsen N, et al. Multifactorial
intervention and cardiovascular disease in
patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2003;348(5):383-393.
6. Khunti K, Zaccardi F, Amod A, et al. Glycaemic
control is still central in the hierarchy of
priorities in type 2 diabetes management.
Diabetologia. 2024 [Epub ahead of print]. DOI:
10.1007/s00125-024-06254-w.
7. American Diabetes Association Professional
Practice Committee. 9. Pharmacologic
approaches to glycemic treatment: Standards
of care in diabetes-2024. Diabetes Care.
2024;47(Suppl 1):S158-S178.
8. National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE). NICE guideline [NG28] Type
2 diabetes in adults: Management. Available
from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng28
[Accessed August 2024].
9. World Health Organization. Web Annex
A. World Health Organization Model List
of Essential Medicines - 23rd List. In: The
selection and use of essential medicines 2023:
Executive summary of the report of the 24th
WHO Expert Committee on the Selection and
Use of Essential Medicines, 24 - 28 April 2023.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023
(WHO/MHP/HPS/EML/2023.02). Licence: CC
BY-NC-SA3.0 IGO.
10. Piggott T, Nowak A, Brignardello-Petersen
R, et al. Global status of essential medicine
selection: a systematic comparison of national
essential medicine lists with recommendations
by WHO. BMJ Open. 2022;12(2):e053349.
11. Budhram D, Benipal S, Bilimoria K, et al.
Essential diabetes medicines and health
outcomes in 127 countries. Diabetes Obes
Metab. 2021;23(5):1121-1128.
12. Ceriello A, Prattichizzo F, Phillip M, et al.
Glycaemic management in diabetes: Old and
new approaches. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2022;10(1):75-84.
13. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al.
Management of hyperglycemia in type
2 diabetes, 2022. A consensus report by
the American Diabetes Association (ADA)
and the European Association for the
Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care.
2022;45(11):2753-2786.
14. American Diabetes Association Professional
Practice Committee. 5. Facilitating positive
health behaviors and well-being to improve
health outcomes: Standards of care in
diabetes-2024. Diabetes Care. 2024;47(Suppl
1):S77-S110. Erratum in: Diabetes Care.
2024;47(4):761-762.
15. Cochran J, Conn VS. Meta-analysis of
quality of life outcomes following diabetes
self-management training. Diabetes Educ.
2008;34(5):815-823.
16. He X, Li J, Wang B, et al. Diabetes selfmanagement education reduces risk of
all-cause mortality in type 2 diabetes patients:
A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Endocrine. 2017;55(3):712-731.
17. Robbins JM, Thatcher GE, Webb DA, et al.
Nutritionist visits, diabetes classes, and
hospitalization rates and charges: the Urban
Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(4):655660.
18. Strawbridge LM, Lloyd JT, Meadow A, et
al. One-year outcomes of diabetes selfmanagement training among medicare
beneficiaries newly diagnosed with diabetes.
Med Care. 2017;55(4):391-397.
19. Jayedi A, Zeraattalab-Motlagh S, Jabbarzadeh B,
et al. Dose-dependent effect of carbohydrate
restriction for type 2 diabetes management: A
systematic review and dose-response metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J
Clin Nutr. 2022;116(1):40-56.
20. Dorans KS, Bazzano LA, Qi L, et al. Effects of
a low-carbohydrate dietary intervention on
hemoglobin A1c: A randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Netw Open. 2022;5(10):e2238645.
21. Zafar MI, Mills KE, Zheng J, et al. Low-glycemic
index diets as an intervention for diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin
Nutr. 2019;110(4):891-902.
Chapter 3
22. Barnard ND, Cohen J, Jenkins DJ, et al. A lowfat vegan diet and a conventional diabetes
diet in the treatment of type 2 diabetes: A
randomized, controlled, 74-wk clinical trial. Am
J Clin Nutr. 2009;89(5):1588S-1596S.
23. Desjardins C, Leblay L, Bélanger A, et al.
Relationship between diet quality and
glucose-lowering medication intensity among
adults with type 2 diabetes: Results from the
CARTaGENE cohort. CJC Open. 2024;6(1):20-29.
24. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Group. Effect of intensive blood-glucose
control with metformin on complications
in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes
(UKPDS 34). Lancet. 1998;352(9131):854-865.
25. Maruthur NM, Tseng E, Hutfless S, et al.
Diabetes medications as monotherapy or
metformin-based combination therapy for
type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Ann Intern Med. 2016;164(11):740751.
26. Kalra S, Bahendeka S, Sahay R, et al.
Consensus recommendations on sulfonylurea
and sulfonylurea combinations in the
management of type 2 diabetes mellitus International Task Force. Indian J Endocrinol
Metab. 2018;22(1):132-157.
27. Marx N, Federici M, Schütt K, et al. 2023
ESC Guidelines for the management of
cardiovascular disease in patients with
diabetes. Eur Heart J. 2023;44(39):4043-4140.
28. Prattichizzo F, Ceriello A. Is time ready
for combination therapy at diagnosis of
type 2 diabetes? Diabetes Metab Res Rev.
2021;37(5):e3460.
29. Crowley MJ, McGuire DK, Alexopoulos AS,
et al. Effects of liraglutide on cardiovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes patients with
and without baseline metformin use: Post hoc
analyses of the LEADER trial. Diabetes Care.
2020;43(9):e108-e110.
30. Neuen BL, Arnott C, Perkovic V, et al.
Sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors
with and without metformin: A metaanalysis of cardiovascular, kidney and
mortality outcomes. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2021;23(2):382-390.
31. Masson W, Lavalle-Cobo A, Lobo M, et
al. Novel antidiabetic drugs and risk of
cardiovascular events in patients without
baseline metformin use: A meta-analysis. Eur J
Prev Cardiol. 2021;28(1):69-75.
32. Ceriello A, Lucisano G, Prattichizzo F, et al.
The legacy effect of hyperglycemia and early
use of SGLT-2 inhibitors: A cohort study with
newly-diagnosed people with type 2 diabetes.
Lancet Reg Health Eur. 2023;31:100666.
33. Sundström J, Kristófi R, Östlund O, et al. A
registry-based randomised trial comparing an
SGLT2 inhibitor and metformin as standard
treatment of early stage type 2 diabetes
(SMARTEST): Rationale, design and protocol.
J Diabetes Complications. 2021;35(10):107996.
34. Samson SL, Vellanki P , Blonde L, et al.
American Association of Clinical Endocrinology
Consensus Statement: Comprehensive Type
2 Diabetes Management Algorithm - 2023
Update. Endocr Pract. 2023;29(5):305-340.
35. Bain SC, Klufas MA, Ho A, et al. Worsening of
diabetic retinopathy with rapid improvement
in systemic glucose control: A review. Diabetes
Obes Metab. 2019;21(3):454-466.
36. Matthews DR, Paldánius PM, Proot P , et al.
Glycaemic durability of an early combination
therapy with vildagliptin and metformin
versus sequential metformin monotherapy in
newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes (VERIFY): A
5-year, multicentre, randomised, double-blind
trial. Lancet. 2019;394(10208):1519-1529.
37. Abdul-Ghani M, Puckett C, Adams J, et al.
Durability of triple combination therapy versus
stepwise addition therapy in patients with
new-onset T2DM: 3-year follow-up of EDICT.
Diabetes Care. 2021;44(2):433-439.
38. Kim NH, Moon JS, Lee YH, et al. Efficacy
and tolerability of initial triple combination
therapy with metformin, dapagliflozin and
saxagliptin compared with stepwise add-on
therapy in drug-naïve patients with type 2
diabetes (TRIPLE-AXEL study): A multicentre,
randomized, 104-week, open-label, activecontrolled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2024;26(9):3642-3652.
39. Wright AK, Carr MJ, Kontopantelis E, et al.
Primary prevention of cardiovascular and
heart failure events with SGLT2 inhibitors,
GLP-1 receptor agonists, and their
combination in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2022;45(4):909-918.
40. Dave CV, Kim SC, Goldfine AB, et al. Risk of
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type
2 diabetes after addition of SGLT2 inhibitors
versus sulfonylureas to baseline GLP-1RA
therapy. Circulation. 2021;143(8):770-779.
41. Chew BH, Mohd-Yusof BN, Lai PSM, Khunti K.
Overcoming therapeutic inertia as the Achilles’
heel for improving suboptimal diabetes care:
An integrative review. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul).
2023;38(1):34-42.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES – NON-INSULIN
42. Reach G, Pechtner V, Gentilella R, et al.
Clinical inertia and its impact on treatment
intensification in people with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Diabetes Metab. 2017;43(6):501-511.
43. Bennett WL, Maruthur NM, Singh S, et al.
Comparative effectiveness and safety of
medications for type 2 diabetes: an update
including new drugs and 2-drug combinations.
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154(9):602-613.
44. Maloney A, Rosenstock J, Fonseca V. A modelbased meta-analysis of 24 antihyperglycemic
drugs for type 2 diabetes: Comparison of
treatment effects at therapeutic doses. Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 2019;105(5):1213-1223.
45. O’Neil H, Todd A, Pearce M, et al. What are the
consequences of over and undertreatment of
type 2 diabetes mellitus in a frail population?
A systematic review. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab.
2024;7(2):e00470.
46. Lipska KJ, Ross JS, Miao Y, et al. Potential
overtreatment of diabetes mellitus in older
adults with tight glycemic control. JAMA Intern
Med. 2015;175(3):356-362.
Chapter 3
Blood Glucose-Lowering
Therapies – Insulin Options
for Type 2 Diabetes
Chapter 4
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES – INSULIN
Chapter 4
RECOMMENDATIONS
Optimal Care Basic Care
Insulin initiation
• Begin insulin therapy when
optimised glucose-lowering
medications and lifestyle
interventions do not maintain target
blood glucose control
• Begin insulin therapy when
optimised available glucoselowering medications and lifestyle
interventions do not maintain target
blood glucose control
Support
• Provide education, continuing
lifestyle management, and regular
review, including telehealth
• Provide education, continuing
lifestyle management, and regular
review
Monitoring
• Self-monitoring of blood glucose
• Consider CGM with complex insulin
regimens and insulin pump therapy
• Regular HbA1c measurement
• Self-monitoring of blood glucose
• Regular HbA1c measurement
Insulin regimen
• Select from a broad range of
affordable insulins and insulin
delivery devices
• Access to insulin pump therapy
available
• Select from a limited range of
affordable and continuously
available insulin
Insulin initiation
• Commence with single daily injection
of basal analogue insulin
• Continue metformin (if tolerated and
not contraindicated)
• Continue with other blood glucoselowering therapies if appropriate
• Commence with single daily injection
of affordable human, analogue, or
biosimilar insulin
• Continue metformin (if tolerated and
not contraindicated)
• Continue with other affordable and
available blood glucose-lowering
therapies if appropriate
Insulin
intensification
• Options include:
- Basal bolus
- Premixed insulin
- Add GLP-1RA (either separately or
switch to FDC)
- Insulin pump
• Options include:
- Basal bolus
- Premixed human insulin
- Other affordable and available
blood glucose-lowering therapies
Insulin
deintensification
• Regularly review insulin dose, need for insulin, and complex insulin regimens,
especially in the elderly and individuals at target glycaemia or experiencing
hypoglycaemia
• Deintensify and simplify treatment as required
CGM, continuous glucose monitor; FDC, fixed-dose combination; GLP-1RA, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; HbA1c,
glycated haemoglobin.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES - INSULIN
o Insulin therapy is a key option for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) when non‐insulin
treatments fail to achieve glycaemic targets.
o Long term outcome studies confirm insulin’s efficacy in improving glycaemic control and
its legacy effect on reducing micro- and macrovascular complications in T2DM.
o The decision to use insulin should consider the individual’s views on safety, cultural values,
social and religious influences, health literacy and language barriers.
o A diverse range of insulin types (human, analogue, and biosimilar) is available.
o The clinical effects of these insulin types in T2DM are similar except for small differences in
hypoglycaemia between intermediate human and long-acting analogue insulins.
o Global access to insulin remains a significant challenge and only about half of those with
T2DM who could benefit have access to appropriate insulin therapy due to regulatory,
supply chain, cost, and device access barriers.
o Biosimilar insulins offer the potential for cost reduction and improved accessibility.
o The different insulin pharmacokinetic profiles, ultra rapid-acting, rapid-acting, short-acting,
intermediate-acting, and long-acting, facilitate personalised and tailored treatment.
o Premixed insulins offer a range of fixed-dose combinations of rapid- or short-acting with
intermediate- or long-acting insulins aiming to control fasting and postprandial glucose.
o Combining insulin with other agents such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor
agonists (including fixed dose combinations) or sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors has the potential to enhance glycaemic control, promote weight loss, reduce
insulin dosage, and lower hypoglycaemia risk.
o Insulin initiation typically begins by adding once daily basal insulin and continuing some
oral blood glucose lowering medication(s), with treatment intensification options including
adding prandial insulin, switching to premixed regimens, adding a GLP-1 receptor agonist
or an SGLT2 inhibitor, tailored to the individual glycaemic responses and preferences, and
resource considerations.
o Regular reassessment of insulin therapy is essential and insulin deintensification or
simplification should be regularly considered, especially in older or frail individuals, to
minimise hypoglycaemia risk, reduce treatment burden, and improve quality of life.
KEY POINTS
Chapter 4
BACKGROUND
Insulin therapy is an often-used therapeutic
option in people with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) when glycaemic control is not achieved
with non-insulin blood glucose-lowering
therapies. The decision to use insulin therapy
should not only consider glycaemic control but
also take into account the individual’s views
on insulin safety, cultural values and beliefs,
social influences, religious considerations,
health literacy, and language barriers. The
diverse landscape of insulin types allows for
customisation to address specific requirements
of the individual. Advances in the manufacture
and design of commercial insulin have
guaranteed supplies and led to insulins with
different pharmacokinetics as well as the
potential for more flexible and personalised
treatment regimens. The emergence of
biosimilar insulins provides an opportunity to
decrease cost and increase global insulin access.
The development of fixed-dose combinations
(FDCs) of basal insulin and glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists adds to the
range of insulin-related treatments.
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Global access to insulin remains a challenge. The
World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that
15% of people with T2DM require insulin, but
only half are appropriately treated because of
barriers to insulin availability such as regulatory
challenges and issues with supply chains and cost.1
A range of insulins are listed in the WHO Model
List of Essential Medicines (Table 4.1).
Insulin (soluble and intermediate) has been
listed since the first WHO Essential Medicine List
in 1977. In 2021, long-acting insulin analogues
(insulin glargine, detemir, degludec, and their
quality-assured biosimilars, as therapeutic
alternatives) were added, with the WHO Expert
Committee on the Selection and Use of Essential
Medicines noting that access to affordable
human insulin remained a critical global
priority.1 In addition, appropriate use of insulin
is hampered by a lack of access to affordable
medical devices for safe administration and
optimal glucose monitoring to guide insulin
use.1 The challenges of global access to insulin
are experienced in most regions of the world.3
EVIDENCE SUMMARY
Insulins can be described by the method
of manufacture and their pharmacokinetic
characteristics.
Methods of modern-day insulin
manufacture
Human insulin
In the past, insulin was obtained from pig and
beef pancreas. These were replaced in the 1980s
Medicines for Diabetes
Insulins
Insulin injection (soluble)*
*including quality-assured biosimilars
Injection: 40 IU/mL in 10 mL vial; 100 IU/mL in 10 mL
vial; 100 IU/mL in 3 mL cartridge or pre-filled pen.
Intermediate-acting insulin*
*including quality-assured biosimilars
Injection: 40 IU/mL in 10 mL vial; 100 IU/mL in 10 mL
vial; 100 IU/mL in 3 mL cartridge or pre-filled pen (as
compound insulin zinc suspension or isophane insulin).
Long-acting insulin analogues*
Therapeutic alternatives:
• insulin degludec
• insulin detemir
• insulin glargine
*including quality-assured biosimilars
Injection: 100 IU/mL in 3 mL cartridge or pre-filled
pen.
Table 4.1 World Health Organization Model List of Essential Medicines – 23rd List (2023)
Adapted from World Health Organization, 2023.2
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES - INSULIN
by genetically engineered human insulin made by
recombinant DNA technology using fermentation
in micro-organisms (bacteria or yeast).
Consequently, human insulin can be produced
in large quantities with a high level of purity and
consistent quality at relatively low cost.4
Analogue insulin
The first insulin analogue (insulin Lispro rDNA)
was approved for human therapy in 1996.
Analogue insulins are genetic modifications of
human insulin, produced using recombinant
DNA technology, and designed to alter the
absorption of subcutaneously injected insulin.
Following subcutaneous injection, insulin
molecules form a depot from which absorption
into the systemic circulation occurs. All insulin
molecules have a tendency to self-aggregate
into hexameric complexes, and these clusters
must dissociate into dimers and monomers
to enter the bloodstream. The pharmacologic
features of individual insulin analogue
preparations largely alter the rate of hexamer
dissociation and insulin movement into the
circulation. Fast-acting analogues either have
less tendency to aggregate after injection or
dissociate quickly and enter the bloodstream
faster; long-acting analogues aggregate more,
remain aggregated for longer, and enter the
bloodstream slowly.
Biosimilar insulin
Biosimilar insulin is also developed through
recombinant DNA technology and is highly
similar to an already approved reference
insulin.5 Criteria for approval of a biosimilar
require a quality assessment; demonstration
of similarity in physicochemical and biological
characterisation, including receptor binding,
metabolic potency, and mitogenicity;
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic profiles
in phase 1 studies; and assessment of safety
endpoints in phase 3 clinical trials, with an
emphasis on immunogenicity.6
The first biosimilar insulin, Abasaglar, was
approved in the European Union in 2014 and in
the US, the first biosimilar insulin (Basaglar) was
approved in 2016.6 Semglee (insulin glargineyfgn) received FDA approval in July 2021 as the
first interchangeable insulin glargine biosimilar.7
Studies consistently demonstrate the efficacy and
safety of biosimilar insulin analogues in glycaemic
control, with no notable differences in insulin
antibody formation compared to reference.8
Biosimilar insulins present an option for lowerpriced and efficacious insulin alternatives.9
Categorisation of insulin by
pharmacokinetic characteristics
Insulin can be categorised into five groups: ultra
rapid-acting analogue (URAA) insulins, rapidacting analogue insulins (RAAI), short-acting
human insulins, intermediate-acting human
insulins, and long-acting analogue insulins.
Notable examples are shown in Table 4.2.
The pharmacokinetic profiles of insulin
analogues are significantly altered by changing
the amino acid sequence compared with native
human insulin. Increasing the onset of action
is designed to better control postprandial
glucose excursions, whereas the long-acting
insulins are designed to control fasting plasma
glucose levels. The main anticipated beneficial
consequences include improved glycaemic
control and reduced hypoglycaemia compared
with human insulin.
However, this has not been clearly established in
T2DM. A Cochrane systematic review concluded
that overall, there were no clear benefits of rapidacting analogue insulin over regular short-acting
human insulin in people with T2DM in change in
glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) or number of nonsevere hypoglycaemic episodes.10
There is limited evidence on ultra rapid-acting
analogue (URAA) insulins in T2DM. A recent
Ultra rapid-acting
analogue insulins
(URAA)
Rapid-acting
analogue insulins
(RAAI)
Short-acting human
insulins
Intermediate-acting
human insulins
Long-acting analogue
insulins
Faster aspart (URAsp)
Insulin lispro-aabc
(URLi)
Insulin lispro
Insulin aspart
Insulin glulisine
Regular human insulin NPH human insulin Insulin glargine
Insulin detemir
Insulin degludec
Insulin glargine-yfgn
(Semglee)
NPH, neutral protamine Hagedorn.
Table 4.2 Types of insulins
Chapter 4
meta-analysis showed no difference in HbA1c
compared with RAAI but a small reduction in
1-hour (but not 2-hour) postprandial glucose in
people with T2DM, and consequently concluded
that they are not routinely recommended.11
Another Cochrane systematic review in people
with T2DM compared long-acting analogue
insulins (insulin glargine and insulin detemir)
with intermediate-acting human insulin (NPH
insulin) and showed that while the effect on
HbA1c was comparable, treatment with insulin
glargine and insulin detemir was associated with
fewer participants experiencing hypoglycaemia
compared with NPH insulin. Treatment with
insulin detemir also reduced the incidence
of serious hypoglycaemia; however, serious
hypoglycaemic events were rare.12
Premixed insulins
Premixed insulins (Table 4.3) offer a diverse
array of fixed component formulations
designed to address both fasting and
postprandial glycaemia. 13,14 These formulations
combine rapid or short-acting insulin with
intermediate- or long-acting insulin and their
pharmacokinetic profile is designed to strike
a balance between 24-hour efficacy and
convenience for the person with T2DM. 14
The efficacy of premixed insulins in improving
glycaemic control is well-established. Premixed
analogues were found to be similar to premixed
human insulin in lowering fasting glucose,
HbA1c, and the incidence of hypoglycaemia,
but more effective in lowering postprandial
glucose. Compared to long-acting insulin
analogues, premixed analogues were superior in
lowering postprandial glucose and HbA1c (mean
difference –0.39% [-4 mmol/mol]) but inferior
in lowering fasting glucose, and had higher
incidence of hypoglycaemia.16
Premixed and basal bolus regimens (defined
as any basal injection with at least a single
bolus injection per day) have been compared
in randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and
real-world settings. There were no significant
differences between the insulin regimens but
there was a discordance between real-world and
RCT data. Both insulin regimens were associated
with HbA1c reductions (real-world data –0.28%
[-3 mmol/mol]; RCT data, –1.4% [-15 mmol/mol])
and weight gain (real-world data, +0.27 kg; RCT
data, +2.96 kg), demonstrating greater changes
in RCTs compared with real-world conditions.17
Combining insulin and a GLP-1 receptor
agonist
Treatment can be intensified in a person with
insulin-treated T2DM by adding a GLP-1 receptor
agonist. A systematic review comparing basal
plus/basal bolus and adding a GLP-1 receptor
agonist to insulin combinations was associated
with a similar HbA1c reduction (-0.06% [-0.7
mmol/mol]) but greater weight loss (-3.72 kg),
a lower incidence of hypoglycaemic events
(relative risk [RR] -0.46), and a reduction in
insulin dosage of 30.3 units/day.18
Fixed-dose combinations (FDC) of insulin and a
GLP-1 receptor agonist are available. IDegLira
is a combination of insulin degludec (IDeg) and
liraglutide with one unit of IDeg combined with
0.036 mg of liraglutide. IGlarLixi is a combination
of insulin glargine and lixisenatide with one unit
of insulin glargine combined with 0.33-to-1 μg
of lixisenatide. These products are administered
once daily and aim to optimise efficacy and
minimise drawbacks associated with individual
components.19 Compared with a control group
(mostly the individual components or another
Type of premixed insulin Low-mixed formulations Mid-mixed formulations High-mixed formulations
Premixed human regular
insulin-NPH insulin
30% regular insulin/70% NPH
insulin
50% regular insulin/50% NPH
insulin
75% regular insulin/25% NPH
insulin
Premixed insulin analogues 30% insulin aspart/70% insulin
aspart protamine
25% insulin lispro/75% insulin
lispro protamine
50% insulin aspart/50% insulin
aspart protamine
50% insulin lispro/50% insulin
lispro protamine
75% insulin lispro/25% insulin
lispro protamine
Coformulation 70% insulin degludec/30%
insulin aspart
NPH, neutral protamine Hagedorn.
Adapted from Kalra et al. 201815
Table 4.3 Formulations of premixed insulin
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES - INSULIN
insulin regimen), IDegLira significantly lowered
HbA1c by 0.63% (7 mmol/mol) but there was
no difference in body weight change. The
percentage of those achieving HbA1c <6.5% or
<7.0% (<48 mmol/mol or <53 mmol/mol) without
weight gain and hypoglycaemia episodes was
higher with IDegLira.20 Similar results were
reported for iGlarLixi, which achieved an HbA1c
reduction of 0.56% (6 mmol/mol).21
A meta-analysis of RCTs compared free or
FDC combinations of a GLP-1 receptor agonist
plus basal insulin versus insulin intensification
on glycaemic control in people with T2DM.
Compared with insulin uptitration, insulin and
GLP-1 receptor agonist combined therapy
resulted in a significantly greater decrease in
HbA1c (-0.53% [-6 mmol/mol]), more individuals
at HbA1c target, greater reduction in body
weight (-1.9 kg) but similar hypoglycaemic
events. Results did not differ in either the
free or FDC subgroups.22 Use of FDC has been
associated with increased treatment persistence
and improved adherence.23
Combining insulin and sodium-glucose
cotransporter-2 inhibitors
Insulin can also be effectively combined with
sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors
as reported in a systematic review and metaanalysis. Compared with the control group of
insulin plus placebo or insulin alone, SGLT2 inhibitor
reduced HbA1c by 1.4% (15 mmol/mol), body
weight by 2.3 kg, and decreased the dose of insulin
without increasing the risk of hypoglycaemia.24
Insulin outcome studies
Numerous studies have examined the impact of
insulin therapy on glycaemic control in people
with T2DM. However, there are limited data on
clinical outcomes focused specifically on insulin
treatment, rather than its use as a component of
an intensified glycaemic control strategy in RCTs.
The UKPDS is the main long-term study which
assessed insulin treatment and randomised
people with newly diagnosed T2DM to intensive
glycaemic control (with sulfonylurea or insulin,
or metformin if overweight) or conventional
glycaemic control (primarily diet). Over 10
years, mean HbA1c was 7.0% (53 mmol/mol)
in the intensive group compared with 7.9% (63
mmol/mol) in the conventional group, with no
differences in agents in the intensive group.
Compared with the conventional group, the risk
in the intensive group was 12% significantly lower
for any diabetes-related endpoint, driven by a
significant 25% risk reduction in microvascular
endpoints. There was no difference in endpoints
between sulfonylureas and insulin.25 In the
10-year post-trial follow-up study, participants
randomised to the intensive group with
sulfonylurea or insulin showed a continued 9%
risk reduction for any diabetes-related endpoint
and 24% reduction in microvascular disease. Risk
reductions of 15% for myocardial infarction and
13% in death from any cause emerged over time,
despite an early loss of glycaemic differences.
Outcome results for insulin and sulfonylureas
were not reported separately.26
The UKPDS results have recently been reported
for another 14 years of follow up. The beneficial
effects of early intensive glycaemic control with
sulfonylurea or insulin therapy, compared with
conventional glycaemic control, persisted with
risk reductions of 10% for death from any cause,
17% for myocardial infarction, and 26% for
microvascular disease.27
The ORIGIN study randomised individuals to
insulin glargine to normalise fasting glucose
(targeting a fasting blood glucose level of
≤5.3 mmol/L [≤95 mg/dL]) or standard care to
assess the impact on cardiovascular events.
After a median follow up of 6.2 years, incident
cardiovascular outcomes were similar in the
insulin glargine and standard care groups.28
The GRADE study assessed the comparative
effectiveness of insulin glargine U-100,
glimepiride, liraglutide, and sitagliptin added
to metformin in achieving and maintaining an
HbA1c <7.0% (<53 mmol/mol) in people with
T2DM. During a mean 5.0 years of follow up, the
incidences of microvascular complications and
death were not materially different among the
four treatment groups. There was a possible
non-significant difference among the groups
in the incidence of any cardiovascular disease,
favouring the GLP-1 receptor agonist.29
Overall, insulin is an established and safe
long-term treatment for improving glycaemic
control in people with T2DM and is associated
with a legacy effect of improved micro- and
macrovascular outcomes in newly diagnosed
people with T2DM.
Initiating and optimising insulin therapy
in individuals with T2DM
Although insulin therapy is a treatment option
at any stage of T2DM, it is usually initiated
after other treatments have failed to achieve
Chapter 4
personalised glycaemic targets. It may be
introduced earlier if diabetes control is poor (e.g.,
HbA1c >10% [>86 mmol/mol], blood glucose
consistently >16.7 mmol/L [>300 mg/dL]) and the
person has symptomatic hyperglycaemia.
For most people with T2DM, insulin is usually
used as a third or fourth blood glucose-lowering
therapy in combination with metformin and/or
other blood glucose-lowering therapies, taking
into account level of diabetes control, diabetes
duration, obesity, age, comorbidities, personal
preferences, and medication attributes such as
efficacy, hypoglycaemia risk, adverse events,
availability, and cost.
An overview of insulin initiation and
intensification options is shown in Figure
4.1. Choice will depend on availability and
affordability of options, especially in resourcelimited settings. The most frequently used
options are basal insulin (with or without
prandial insulin) or premixed insulin.
Insulin initiation and treatment
intensification
Insulin treatment is usually initiated with once
daily basal insulin. An alternate approach is to
commence with once or twice daily premixed
insulin. The commencing dose for basal
insulin is 10 units/day or 0.1–0.2 units/kg/
day and increasing 2–4 units or by 10%–15%
units at agreed intervals (often once weekly) to
achieve target fasting plasma glucose, unless
hypoglycaemia occurs.
Care should be taken to avoid excessive
increases in the dose of basal insulin
(“overbasalisation”). There is a ceiling effect
of basal insulin, where increasing doses
result in proportionally smaller reductions
in fasting blood glucose.30 The plateau effect
is observed at doses around 0.5 units/kg/
day, with variations noted in different patient
populations. Exceeding this threshold offers
modest glycaemic benefits and may lead to
weight gain and increased hypoglycaemia.31,32
There is usually a linear response to increasing
basal insulin doses up to 0.3 units/kg/day, but
between 0.3 and 0.5 units/kg/day, the response
diminishes non-linearly. Therefore, treatment
intensification should be considered when basal
insulin doses surpass 0.3 units/kg/day.32
Basal insulin treatment should be intensified in
people who are taking a basal insulin dose of
0.3–0.5 units/kg/day or who have not attained
their personalised HbA1c target and fasting
blood glucose is below 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL).
Assessment of the difference between bedtime
and morning blood glucose values (BeAM value)
may assist in identifying individuals on basal
insulin who need treatment intensification,
with large positive BeAM values with fasting
glucose at goal suggestive of poor control of
postprandial glucose.33
Figure 4.1 Insulin initiation and intensification
†either separately or as a fixed dose combination
GLP-1RA, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES - INSULIN
Adding prandial insulin allows for greater
flexibility for individuals with variable daily
routines but requires a higher level of cognitive
and dexterity abilities, necessitates more
frequent blood glucose monitoring, and may
involve more frequent injections compared
to premixed insulin regimens. An alternate
approach to escalating basal insulin doses
and avoiding additional injections is to add a
blood glucose-lowering oral agent with reduced
hypoglycaemia and weight gain potential such
as a SGLT2 inhibitor.
Treatment intensification by switching from a
basal to a premixed insulin is a simple, safe,
and effective approach, especially in resourcelimited settings.
For individuals on basal bolus insulin who do not
achieve glycaemic targets, further intensification
of insulin therapy involves increasing the
number of bolus injections (multiple daily
injections). This typically involves a basal insulin
and a prandial insulin injection before each
of the main meals. Other glucose-lowering
medications can be continued but sulfonylurea
should be discontinued. Access to blood glucose
monitoring is essential to guide bolus prandial
insulin adjustments.
Finally, insulin pump therapy may be considered.
This is not common in T2DM and requires access
to and affordability of blood glucose monitoring,
preferably continuous glucose monitoring.
However, the lack and cost of the required
technology mean that these options are usually
not available in resource-limited settings.
Insulin and treatment deintensification
As with all therapies, the dose and the
continuing need for insulin should be periodically
reassessed. This is particularly important in
older individuals with T2DM. Deintensifying
insulin treatment may include insulin
discontinuation, dose reduction, or changing to
an alternate medication when benefits outweigh
harm, particularly in older people.34 Real-world
single-arm clinical trials in older individuals
support the findings of improved quality of life,
reduced stress, and fewer complications arising
from hypoglycaemia.35
A particularly concerning trend of overtreatment
relates to individuals with HbA1c below 6.5%
(48 mmol/mol) not being considered or offered
therapy simplification. A population-based
retrospective cohort study using claims database
data reported that over three-quarters of frail
individuals or those with multiple comorbidities
did not undergo therapy simplification, posing
potential risks associated with polypharmacy.36
Treatment simplification should be considered
for all individuals with T2DM on complex insulin
regimens. Triggers for simplification include
poor glycaemic control, adherence difficulties,
hypoglycaemic episodes, substantial weight
gain, comorbidities, cognitive impairments,
frailty, limited life expectancy, a history of
falls, and negative impacts on quality of life.37
Deintensification of complex insulin regimens
can be done by simplifying the regimen from
a basal bolus regimen or with two premixed
insulins to a basal regimen with or without
non-insulin medications. The decision should
be personalised, involving shared decisionmaking and continuous assessments. The
BEYOND trial demonstrated the feasibility of
switching individuals on basal bolus insulin with
inadequate glycaemic control to basal insulin
plus either a SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 receptor
agonist, which resulted in fewer injections,
lower insulin dose, less hypoglycaemia, and
improved glycaemic control.38 In individuals
with proven insulinopaenia (undetectable
C-peptide or history of ketoacidosis or severe
decompensation after insulin reduction or
withdrawal), and in those with long-standing
diabetes and treatment with complex insulin
regimens due to proven ineffectiveness of
other regimens, deintensification by reducing
insulin dose should be performed gradually and
cautiously with regular monitoring.
There are three main options for
intensifying treatment, with the
choice depending on the person’s
preference, blood glucose monitoring
requirement, and medication
availability and cost:
1. Add prandial insulin: administer
one rapid-acting insulin injection
before the meal with the highest
carbohydrate content.
2. Switch to premixed insulin: replace
basal insulin with a premixed
insulin, usually twice daily – before
breakfast and before evening meal.
3. Add a GLP-1 receptor agonist.
Chapter 4
REFERENCES
1. World Health Organization (WHO). Keeping
the 100-year-old promise: Making insulin
access universal. Available from: https://www.
who.int/publications/i/item/9789240039100
[Accessed August 2024].
2. World Health Organization. Web Annex A.
World Health Organization Model List of
Essential Medicines – 23rd List, 2023. In: The
selection and use of essential medicines 2023:
Executive summary of the report of the 24th
WHO Expert Committee on the Selection and
Use of Essential Medicines, 24 - 28 April 2023.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023
(WHO/MHP/HPS/EML/2023.02) Licence: CC BYNC-SA 3.0 IGO.
3. Fralick M, Jenkins AJ, Khunti K, et al. Global
accessibility of therapeutics for diabetes
mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2022;18(4):199204.
4. Beran D, Gale EAM, Yudkin JS. The
insulin market reaches 100. Diabetologia.
2022;65(6):931-935.
5. Heller S, Raposo JF, Tofé S, et al. Breaking
barriers with basal insulin biosimilars in type 2
diabetes. Clin Diabetes. 2023;41(2):154-162.
6. Davies M, Dahl D, Heise T, et al. Introduction
of biosimilar insulins in Europe. Diabet Med.
2017;34(10):1340-1353.
7. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
approves first interchangeable biosimilar
insulin product for treatment of diabetes.
Available from: https://www.fda.gov/
news-events/press-announcements/
fda-approves-first-interchangeablebiosimilar-insulin-product-treatmentdiabetes#:~:text=Semglee%20(insulin%20
glargine%2Dyfgn)%20is%20the%20first%20
interchangeable%20biosimilar,effective%20
options%20for%20treating%20diabetes..
[Accessed August 2024].
8. Yang LJ, Wu TW, Tang CH, et al. Efficacy
and immunogenicity of insulin biosimilar
compared to their reference products: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC
Endocr Disord. 2022;22(1):35.
9. Heinemann L, Fritz I, Khatami H, et al.
Administration of biosimilar insulin analogs:
Role of devices. Diabetes Technol Ther.
2017;19(2):79-84.
10. Fullerton B, Siebenhofer A, Jeitler K, et
al. Short-acting insulin analogues versus
regular human insulin for adult, nonpregnant persons with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2018;12(12):CD013228.
11. Villar-Taibo R, Galdón Sanz-Pastor A,
Fernández-Rubio E, et al. Are new ultra-rapidacting insulins associated with improved
glycemic control and reduced hypoglycemia
in comparison to conventional rapid-acting
insulins for individuals with type 1 and type
2 diabetes? A systematic review and metaanalysis. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2024;26(8):575586.
12. Semlitsch T, Engler J, Siebenhofer A, et al.
(Ultra-)long-acting insulin analogues versus
NPH insulin (human isophane insulin) for
adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2020;11(11):CD005613.
13. Mohan V, Kalra S, Kesavadev J, et al.
Consensus on initiation and intensification
of premix insulin in type 2 diabetes
management. J Assoc Physicians India.
2017;65(4):59-73.
14. Silver B, Ramaiya K, Andrew SB, et al. EADSG
Guidelines: Insulin therapy in diabetes.
Diabetes Ther. 2018;9(2):449-492.
15. Kalra S, Czupryniak L, Kilov G, et al. Expert
opinion: Patient selection for premixed insulin
formulations in diabetes care. Diabetes Ther.
2018;9(6):2185-2199.
16. Qayyum R, Bolen S, Maruthur N, et al.
Systematic review: Comparative effectiveness
and safety of premixed insulin analogues
in type 2 diabetes. Ann Intern Med.
2008;149(8):549-559.
17. Anyanwagu U, Mamza J, Gordon J, et al.
Premixed vs basal-bolus insulin regimen
in type 2 diabetes: Comparison of clinical
outcomes from randomized controlled
trials and real-world data. Diabet Med.
2017;34(12):1728-1736.
18. Castellana M, Cignarelli A, Brescia F, et al.
GLP-1 receptor agonist added to insulin
versus basal-plus or basal-bolus insulin
therapy in type 2 diabetes: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev.
2019;35(1):e3082.
19. Nomoto H. Fixed-ratio combinations of basal
insulin and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor
agonists as a promising strategy for treating
diabetes. World J Diabetes. 2023;14(3):188-197.
20. Liu Y, Li X, Zheng Y, et al. IDegLira for type
2 diabetes: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Endocrine. 2024;83(3):648-658.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
BLOOD GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPIES - INSULIN
21. Liu Y, Li C, Li X, et al. iGlarLixi for type 2
diabetes: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Endocrine. 2024. [Epub ahead of
print]. DOI: 10.1007/s12020-024-03868-3.
22. Maiorino MI, Chiodini P , Bellastella G, et al.
Free and fixed-ratio combinations of basal
insulin and GLP-1 receptor agonists versus
basal insulin intensification in type 2 diabetes:
A systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Obes
Metab. 2018;20(9):2309-2313.
23. Edelman S, Cassarino D, Kayne D, et al.
Treatment persistence and adherence
in people with type 2 diabetes switching
to iGlarLixi vs free-dose combinations of
basal insulin and glucagon-like peptide 1
receptor agonist. J Manag Care Spec Pharm.
2022;28(9):958-968.
24. Yang Y, Chen S, Pan H, et al. Safety and
efficiency of SGLT2 inhibitor combining with
insulin in subjects with diabetes: Systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Medicine (Baltimore).
2017;96(21):e6944. Erratum in: Medicine
(Baltimore). 2017;96(26):e7458.
25. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Group. Intensive blood-glucose control
with sulphonylureas or insulin compared
with conventional treatment and risk of
complications in patients with type 2 diabetes
(UKPDS 33). Lancet. 1998;352(9131):837-853.
26. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, et al. 10-year
follow-up of intensive glucose control in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(15):1577-1589.
27. Adler AI, Coleman RL, Leal J, et al. Post-trial
monitoring of a randomised controlled trial of
intensive glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes
extended from 10 years to 24 years (UKPDS
91). Lancet. 2024;404(10448):145-155.
28. Gerstein HC, Bosch J, Dagenais GR, et al.
Basal insulin and cardiovascular and other
outcomes in dysglycemia. N Engl J Med.
2012;367(4):319-328.
29. Nathan DM, Lachin JM, Bebu I, et al. Glycemia
reduction in type 2 diabetes - microvascular
and cardiovascular outcomes. N Engl J Med.
2022;387(12):1075-1088.
30. Cowart K. Overbasalization: Addressing
hesitancy in treatment intensification
beyond basal insulin. Clin Diabetes.
2020;38(3):304-310.
31. Meece J. Basal insulin intensification in
patients with type 2 diabetes: A review.
Diabetes Ther. 2018;9(3):877-890.
32. Umpierrez GE, Skolnik N, Dex T, et al. When
basal insulin is not enough: A dose-response
relationship between insulin glargine 100
units/mL and glycaemic control. Diabetes Obes
Metab. 2019;21(6):1305-1310.
33. Zisman A, Morales F, Stewart J, et al. BeAM
value: An indicator of the need to initiate and
intensify prandial therapy in patients with type
2 diabetes mellitus receiving basal insulin. BMJ
Open Diabetes Res Care. 2016;4(1):e000171.
34. Seidu S, Kunutsor SK, Topsever P , et al.
Deintensification in older patients with type 2
diabetes: A systematic review of approaches,
rates and outcomes. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2019;21(7):1668-1679.
35. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, et al.
Simplification of insulin regimen in older
adults and risk of hypoglycemia. JAMA Intern
Med. 2016;176(7):1023-1025.
36. McAlister FA, Youngson E, Eurich DT.
Treatment deintensification is uncommon
in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A
retrospective cohort study. Circ Cardiovasc
Qual Outcomes. 2017;10(4):e003514.
37. Jude EB, Malecki MT, Gomez Huelgas R, et al.
Expert panel guidance and narrative review
of treatment simplification of complex insulin
regimens to improve outcomes in type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Ther. 2022;13(4):619-634.
38. Giugliano D, Longo M, Caruso P , et al.
Feasibility of simplification from a basal-bolus
insulin regimen to a fixed-ratio formulation
of basal insulin plus a GLP-1RA or to basal
insulin plus an SGLT2 inhibitor: BEYOND, a
randomized, pragmatic trial. Diabetes Care.
2021;44(6):1353-1360.
Chapter 4
Weight Control in
Type 2 Diabetes Management
Chapter 5
WEIGHT CONTROL
Chapter 5
Optimal Care Basic Care
Weight reduction
• Lifestyle change
• VLCD
• Incretin-based therapy
• Metabolic bariatric surgery
• Lifestyle change
• Low-calorie diet
• Use weight-sparing BGL therapy
• SGLT2i if available
Improving
diabetes control
• Lifestyle change
• Incretin-based therapy
• Metabolic bariatric surgery
• Lifestyle change
• Metformin
• Add weight-sparing BGL therapy
when indicated
• SGLT2i if available
Diabetes
prevention
• Lifestyle change
• Consider:
- Metformin
- SGLT2i/incretin-based therapy
- Metabolic bariatric surgery
• Lifestyle change
• Consider metformin
Diabetes remission
• Lifestyle change
• VLCD
• Metabolic bariatric surgery
• Lifestyle change
• Low-calorie diet
• VLCD
BGL, blood glucose-lowering; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor; VLCD, very low-calorie diet.
RECOMMENDATIONS
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
WEIGHT CONTROL
o Obesity is a major driver of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) accounting for an estimated
43% of cases globally and a major factor in the increase in childhood T2DM.
o People in many Asian countries develop T2DM at a lower body weight and a high
proportion have an ideal body weight at diagnosis.
o A complex interplay of biological, genetic, socioeconomic, educational, environmental, and
commercial factors underlies both obesity and T2DM.
o The health and economic burden of diabetes is immense accounting for around 12% of
global health expenditure (nearly US $1.015 trillion annually); lower- and middle-income
countries (LMICs) face the double burden of malnutrition and rising obesity rates.
o There is compelling evidence that strategies to reduce weight can prevent and reverse
T2DM and other obesity-associated comorbidities.
o While several factors influence the relationship of weight and T2DM control, in general a 1 kg
weight loss results in a 0.1% (1.1 mmol/mol) reduction in glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c).
o Ethnic-specific cut-offs for BMI and waist circumference should be used.
o A stratified, personalised approach to weight management, ranging from lifestyle
interventions (nutrition, physical activity, behavioural counselling) to pharmacotherapy and
metabolic bariatric surgery, is recommended based on the severity of overweight/obesity,
associated comorbidities and available resources.
o Intensive lifestyle interventions, very low-calorie diets and metabolic bariatric surgery can
result in T2DM remission but maintaining long term remission is challenging.
o Incretin-based therapies (such as semaglutide, tirzepatide, and retatrutide) show robust
efficacy for weight loss and improved glycaemic control but their high cost and limited
availability restrict their use in resource-limited settings.
o The choice of blood glucose-lowering therapies should consider their impact on body
weight - agents like sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, glucagonlike peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist and metformin promote weight loss, whereas
sulfonylureas and glitazones tend to increase weight.
o Metabolic bariatric surgery is associated with longer term diabetes remission, improved
glycaemic control and benefits on microvascular and macrovascular outcomes but
availability and access are often restricted, especially in resource-limited settings.
KEY POINTS
Chapter 5
BACKGROUND
There is a close relationship between diabetes
and obesity. Obesity is estimated to be
responsible for around 218 million cases of type
2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and is associated
with a seven-fold increased risk of developing
T2DM compared with a healthy weight. Globally,
obesity is responsible for around 43% of T2DM
cases. However, this relationship varies across
countries. In the US and UK, obesity contributes
to an estimated 80%–90% of T2DM while in
many Asian countries people develop T2DM at
a lower body weight, with one study showing
that 63% of people with T2DM diabetes in India
had an ideal body weight at diagnosis. The
increasing rates of childhood obesity are a major
factor in the increase of childhood T2DM.1
A complex interplay of common factors
contributes to obesity and T2DM, including
biology, genetics, food, education, social
deprivation, social economic status, healthcare
access, stigma, and commercial determinants
of health.1
The health and economic burden of diabetes
has profound repercussions, particularly in
lower- and middle-income countries (LMICs),2,3
where there is the paradoxical double burden
of malnutrition and soaring obesity.3 Diabetes
consumes approximately 12% of global health
expenditure, translating to US $1.015 trillion
annually.4 This cost has surged by 338% in the
last 17 years and is projected to reach US $1.043
trillion by 2050.4
There is now compelling evidence that
strategies to reduce weight can prevent and
reverse T2DM and other obesity-associated
conditions and comorbidities.
Overweight and obesity are commonly defined
by body mass index (BMI). Since this measure
alone may not provide information about the
health of an individual, there has been a recent
call to identify increased adiposity as an indicator
of clinical obesity to guide management
decisions. T2DM is an established obesity-related
disorder and an indicator of clinical obesity and
consequently management of overweight and
obesity is an important aspect of diabetes care.5
Since Asians manifest T2DM at lower body
weights, lower cut-offs are proposed for
defining overweight and obesity in these
populations (Table 5.1).
Unhealthy weight can also be characterised
by measurement of waist circumference and
should be interpreted using published ethnicspecific cut-points.7 The routine measurement of
waist circumference can also be used to guide
management and determine the efficacy of
weight reduction interventions.7
Weight management treatment options are
usually guided by the severity of overweight/
obesity assessed by weight anthropometry
(BMI/waist circumference) and tailored to
improve person-specific cardiovascular, renal,
and metabolic outcomes using a personalised
Table 5.1 Classification of weight category by race/ethnic-appropriate body mass index (BMI)6
BMI, body mass index.
General population Asian populations
Obesity BMI ≥30 BMI ≥27.5
Obesity class I BMI 30–34.9 BMI 27.5–32.4
Obesity class II BMI 35–39.9 BMI 32.5–37.4
Obesity class III BMI ≥40 BMI ≥37.5
Overweight BMI 25–29.9 BMI 23–27.4
Normal BMI 18.5–25 BMI 18.5–22.9
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
WEIGHT CONTROL
treatment plan (Table 5.2). Success requires a
combination of caring and supportive health
professionals, a motivated person, and a
flexible programme which uses the range of
available options.
Treatment should always include supervised
lifestyle interventions, which can be intensified
with reduced or low energy diet, very low-calorie
diet (VLCD), pharmacotherapy, or metabolic
bariatric surgery (MBS). Unfortunately, the
availability and affordability of weight control
treatment options is limited globally.
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Weight control is complex and requires
significant health resources. The relationship
between weight and T2DM varies considerably
across countries and many weight control
recommendations have limited relevance
where a significant proportion of the diabetes
population is not overweight or obese.
Large-scale weight control programmes are
particularly challenging in countries faced
with the double burden of malnutrition and
increasing rates of overweight/obesity.
The emerging incretin-based anti-obesity
medications are costly and not generally
affordable or reimbursed in most countries and
especially in resource-limited settings. Access is
also an issue with metabolic bariatric surgery.
With limited availability and affordability of
BGL medications with established weight loss
potential in many countries throughout the
world, alternate weight mitigating strategies
become increasingly important including
nutrition education and use of BGL medications
with minimal negative impact on weight.
EVIDENCE SUMMARY
Weight loss results in improvement of a range
of parameters relevant to improving outcomes
in people with T2DM linked to the degree of
weight loss.8
Weight loss and diabetes control
A number of factors influence the relationship
of weight and diabetes control (glycated
haemoglobin [HbA1c] change) in people with
T2DM, including choice of blood glucoselowering (BGL) therapy and baseline HbA1c.
However, as a general guide, a 1 kg weight loss
is estimated to result in a 0.1% reduction in
HbA1c (approximately 1.1 mmol/mol), although
a higher baseline HbA1c is associated with a
greater reduction in HbA1c for the same degree
of weight loss.9
Impact of weight loss in type 2 diabetes
Preventing type 2 diabetes
As reviewed in Chapter 1, lifestyle interventions
and pharmacotherapy can prevent progression
from intermediate hyperglycaemia, in particular
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), to T2DM and
can also reverse intermediate hyperglycaemia
to normoglycaemia.
* Refer to Table 5.1.
T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Intervention 25.0–26.9
(or 23.0–24.9*)
27.0–29.9
(or 25.0–27.4*) ≥30.0 (or ≥27.5*)
Nutrition, physical
activity, and
behavioural
counselling
Indicated in all
individuals
Indicated in all
individuals as an adjunct
to intensifying treatment
Indicated in all
individuals as an adjunct
to intensifying treatment
Pharmacotherapy Preferred treatment
intensification option
if available
Initial treatment
intensification option
if available
Metabolic bariatric
surgery (MBS)
Consider in individuals
with comorbidities
Table 5.2 A stratified approach to weight management in people with T2DM
Chapter 5
In the US Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP),
an average weight loss of 6.7% was associated
with a 58% reduced incidence of T2DM in people
with IGT.10 A subsequent analysis showed
that for every kilogram of weight lost there
was a 16% reduction in risk for progression
to diabetes, but after 10 kg weight loss, there
was negligible benefit of further weight loss on
diabetes risk reduction.11 These data illustrate
that even 1–2 kg of weight loss in people at risk
for developing T2DM can have health benefits,
although it is generally accepted that a weight
loss of at least 2.5% or more is required, with
maximal impact on T2DM prevention occurring
at 10% weight loss.12
Type 2 diabetes remission
It has long been recognised that in some
people with T2DM, glucose levels can improve
into the normal range either spontaneously or
after medical or surgical interventions, which
can persist, at least temporarily, after glucoselowering pharmacotherapy is withdrawn. This
occurrence is now referred to as “remission”
and is generally defined as an HbA1c <6.5%
(48 mmol/mol) without blood glucose
medications for a period of three months
or more.13 However, it should be noted that
publications on diabetes remission have used
various definitions and are therefore not always
directly comparable. Furthermore, current
definitions exclude those achieving remission
while taking newer diabetes and weight loss
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor
agonists based therapies. 14 Since weight loss is
strongly associated with diabetes remission, the
introduction of these newer BGL medications
with significant weight-lowering potential has
raised the question of revisiting the diabetes
remission definition to include a provision for
continuing these medications, analogous to the
situation of metabolic bariatric surgery where
remission is defined in the presence of the
intervention which induced weight loss.
Data from the National Diabetes Audit in
England reported that 1.7% of 2,297,700 people
underwent T2DM remission without specific
intervention. The odds of remission was 2.87-fold
greater in people diagnosed with T2DM within
one year compared to three to five years, and a
BMI reduction of ≥10%, as compared to <5%, was
associated with 3.57 greater odds of remission.15
A younger age, shorter duration of diabetes,
lower baseline weight, and detectable C-peptide
levels without insulin treatment are associated
with the highest diabetes remission rates.16
Intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI), very
low-calorie diet (VLCD), and MBS not only
substantially enhance glycaemic control but may
also induce T2DM remission.
Intensive lifestyle intervention
In the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in
Diabetes) trial in 5,145 overweight or obese
individuals with T2DM, greater weight loss
was achieved in the group randomised to ILI
compared to diabetes education at one year
(-7.9%), which decreased to -3.9% at four years.17
This translated into diabetes remission in 2%
in the control group and 11.5% and 7.3% in ILI
participants at one and four years, respectively.
Very low-calorie diet
VLCDs are effective interventions to induce
rapid weight loss and improving glycaemia.
Two randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of VLCD
interventions in the UK (DiRECT-predominantly
White European) and Qatar (DIADEM-1predominantly Arab) reported significant
reductions in body weight of 11.2%, with T2DM
remission in 45%–60% at 12 months18,19 and
35% in the DiRECT study at 24 months.16 A
small RCT, the South Asian Diabetes Remission
Feasibility Trial (STANDby), of 25 South Asians
in the UK, reported weight loss of 7.2% and
T2DM remission in 38% at four months.20 In a
non-randomised, open-label primary care study
from Australia (DiRECT-Aus), VLCD achieved a
weight loss of 11.2% and T2DM remission in 55%
of 155 participants at one year.21 Maintaining
these remission rates for a longer period is
challenging, as reported by the five-year DiRECT
extension study, with 13% overall remaining in
remission at five years.22
In relation to weight loss required for T2DM
remission, the DiRECT study showed that weight
loss of 5–10 kg (baseline weight approximately
100 kg) resulted in remission rates of 34% at one
year and 29% at two years. With weight losses
of 10–15 kg, remission rates were 57% and 60%
and with weight loss more than 15 kg, remission
rates were 86% and 70%, respectively, at one
and two years. After five years, remission rate
was 19% for individuals maintaining a weight
loss of more than 10 kg.16
Metabolic bariatric surgery (MBS)
MBS offers superior diabetes remission and
blood glucose control compared to non-surgical
interventions for people with T2DM.23,24 In the
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
WEIGHT CONTROL
Alliance of Randomized Trials of Medicine
Versus Metabolic Surgery in Type 2 Diabetes
(ARMMS-T2D), people with T2DM aged
20–65 years and BMI 27–45 kg/m 2 reported
diabetes remission at three years of 37.5% of
participants after MBS compared with 2.6% with
medical/lifestyle intervention. 25
A recent systematic review included 85,473
people with T2DM, of whom 24,451 were in
the surgical group, with follow‐up durations
between five and 15 years. Data on 972 people
from seven studies (three cohort studies
and four RCTs) were available for long-term
assessment of diabetes remission. There was
a significant increase in diabetes remission
with MBS compared with conventional medical
therapy with remission rates of 32% versus 6%
over five to 15 years.26
The wide range of remission rates reported
with MBS may be due to the diversity of
surgical procedures, limited numbers in the
RCTs, different lengths of follow-up, different
definitions of diabetes remission, and difference
in reporting of remission – cumulative remission
(counted as any individual who ever achieved
remission) and/or prevalent remission (counted
as only individuals who were in remission at the
time of measurement).27
MBS improves control of diabetes through
both weight-dependent and weightindependent actions. Some degree of glycaemic
improvement is associated with weight loss
as reported in a meta-analysis of eight studies
involving 1,247 participants who underwent
MBS, which demonstrated that percentage
excess weight loss was positively associated
with remission rate. 28 Furthermore, 75% of
participants who do not achieve diabetes
remission had weight regain. 29 Improvement
in insulin sensitivity following weight loss with
MBS is a likely mechanism and changes in gut
microbiome may also be a factor. A striking
feature of MBS is the rapid improvement in
glycaemic control that precedes weight loss
with reports of individuals being insulin-free
at the time of discharge. Mechanisms driving
these rapid, weight-independent improvements
in glucose homeostasis may be related to
alterations in gut hormones. 27
Mortality and diabetes-related complications
Accumulating data demonstrate that
interventions leading to weight loss in people
with T2DM are associated with reduced
risk of premature mortality and diabetesrelated microvascular and macrovascular
complications. This may be the direct result of
improved control of glycaemic and other risk
factors (hypertension, lipids), or due to periods
of diabetes remission, or a direct effect of
pharmacotherapy used to induce weight loss.
Intensive lifestyle intervention
The primary aim of the LOOK AHEAD study was
to examine whether an intensive lifestyle weight
loss intervention would decrease cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality in 5,145 overweight
or obese people with T2DM. Despite greater
weight loss in the intervention group than in
the control group throughout the study (6.0%
versus 3.5% at study end), after a median followup of 9.6 years, rates of cardiovascular disease
(CVD) events were similar in both groups.30
Secondary analyses showed a benefit on diabetic
nephropathy31 and symptoms of neuropathy.32
Additionally, a recent analysis of study
participants who achieved diabetes remission
at any stage during the study had a 40% lower
rate of CVD and 33% lower rate of chronic kidney
disease after adjusting for HbA1c, lipids, blood
pressure, and CVD history.33 In a similar post-hoc
analysis, weight loss >10% was also associated
with a reduction in CVD by 20%.30,34
Metabolic bariatric surgery
A systematic review assessed long-term
outcomes in 84,890 people with T2DM, of
whom 24,247 underwent MBS (11 studies –
nine retrospective cohort, one prospective
cohort, one small RCT [n = 150]) with follow-up
durations between five and 15 years. Significant
decreases were observed in microvascular
complications incidence (hazard ratio [HR]=0.57),
macrovascular complications incidence
(HR=0.59), and mortality (HR=0.53).26
A recently published network meta-analysis has
undertaken an indirect comparison between
MBS and blood glucose-lowering therapies and
reported an advantage in glycaemic control and
weight management for MBS. However, the
lack of direct head-to-head comparative trials
between MBS and the incretin-based therapies is
a critical research gap.35
Anti-obesity pharmacotherapy
Pharmacotherapeutic options for the
management of obesity were limited in the preincretin-based era. The increasing range of novel
Chapter 5
anti-obesity medications include GLP-1 receptor
agonists (such as higher strength liraglutide
3.0 mg and semaglutide 2.4 mg), dual GLP-1
and GIP receptor agonists (such as tirzepatide),
and triple GLP-1, GIP , and glucagon receptor
agonists (such as retatrutide). However, they are
expensive and not generally available, especially
in resource-limited settings.
Incretin-based therapies have demonstrated
benefits in the management of people with
T2DM, as reviewed in Chapter 3. This section
reviews the incretin-based therapies targeting
weight management and their use in people
with T2DM.
Semaglutide
Semaglutide has been shown to effectively
reduce weight and improve CVD, renal, and
heart failure outcomes in overweight and obese
people with T2DM.
The weight loss efficacy of higher doses of onceweekly subcutaneous GLP-1 receptor agonist,
semaglutide 2.4 mg, has been established in the
STEP-1 trial in people without diabetes with a
BMI ≥30 or ≥27 kg/m2 with one or more weightrelated coexisting condition where placebosubtracted weight loss of 12.4% was observed
over 68 weeks.36
The STEP-2 trial assessed once-weekly
subcutaneous semaglutide 2.4 mg versus 1.0 mg
(approved dose for diabetes management) and
placebo in adults with overweight or obesity and
T2DM. Semaglutide 2.4 mg achieved a placebosubtracted weight loss of 6.2% and a placebosubtracted improvement in HbA1c of 1.4% (15
mmol/mol) over 68 weeks while semaglutide 1.0
mg achieved a placebo-subtracted weight loss of
3.8% and a placebo-subtracted improvement in
HbA1c of 1.1% (12 mmol/mol) over 68 weeks.37
The PIONEER 6 trial randomised 3,183
individuals with T2DM to once-daily oral
semaglutide (14 mg) or placebo for a median of
15.9 months. There was a significant reduction
in body weight (–4.2 kg versus –0.8 kg) and
HbA1c (–1.0% versus –0.3% [-11 mmol/mol
versus -3 mmol/mol]) in the oral semaglutide
compared to placebo group. The primary
outcome (cardiovascular death, non-fatal
myocardial infarction, or non-fatal stroke) was
not significantly different in the oral semaglutide
group versus the placebo group, demonstrating
non-inferiority but not superiority to placebo.38
Among people with T2DM and obesity-related
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction,
semaglutide 2.4 mg once-weekly resulted in a
6.4% greater placebo-subtracted weight loss at
one year and was associated with significantly
larger reductions in heart failure-related
symptoms and physical limitations.39
Tirzepatide
In SURPASS-2, 1,879 adults with T2DM (HbA1c
8.3% [67 mmol/mol], weight 93.7 kg) were
randomised to receive tirzepatide (GLP-1/
GIP dual agonist) 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, or
semaglutide 1.0 mg subcutaneously weekly over
40 weeks. The change from baseline in HbA1c
was -2.01% (-17 mmol/mol), -2.24% (24.5 mmol/
mol), -2.30% (25.1 mmol/mol), and -1.86% (20.3
mmol/mol) and body weight loss was -7.6 kg,
-9.3 kg, -11.2 kg, and -5.7 kg, respectively. An
HbA1c <6.5% (48 mmol/mol) was achieved in
69%, 77%, 80%, and 64% and diabetes remission
(HbA1c <5.7% [<39 mmol/mol]) was achieved in
27%, 40%, 46%, and 19%, respectively.40
The SURMOUNT-2, a 72-week phase 3 trial of
tirzepatide in adults with obesity and T2DM,
demonstrated significant weight reductions
with tirzepatide 10 mg and 15 mg, with mean
body weight decreases of 12.8% and 14.7%,
respectively, compared to a 3.2% reduction in
the placebo group. This study confirmed the
robust effect of tirzepatide on weight loss in
a population with diabetes, with 79%–83% of
tirzepatide-treated participants achieving a body
weight reduction of 5% or higher.41
Similar to semaglutide studies, in the
SURMONT-4 trial, in participants with obesity/
overweight, withdrawing tirzepatide led to
substantial regain of lost weight while those
who continued treatment maintained and
augmented the initial weight reduction.42
The SURPASS-CVOT study is currently examining
the cardiovascular safety and efficacy of
tirzepatide compared with the GLP-1 receptor
agonist dulaglutide in T2D.43
Retatrutide
Retatrutide is a novel GLP-1/GIP/glucagon
receptor triple agonist which is in the early
stages of clinical trials. In a phase 2, doubleblind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial,
338 adults with a BMI ≥30 or ≥27 with at least
one weight-related complication, excluding
diabetes, were randomised to retatrutide 1 mg,
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
WEIGHT CONTROL
2 mg, 4 mg, 12 mg, or placebo administered
subcutaneously once-weekly for 48 weeks. There
was a dose-dependent weight reduction of
8.7%, 16.3%, 21.7% and 24.2% respectively with
increasing dose compared with 2.1% weight loss
in the placebo group. At week 48, 72% of the
participants with intermediate hyperglycaemia
at baseline had a HbA1c <5.7% (<39 mmol/mol)
in the retatrutide groups compared to 22% in
the placebo group.44 In a subsequent study,
adults with T2DM received once-weekly doses
of retatrutide, dulaglutide, or placebo over 24
weeks, with a 36-week follow-up. Retatrutide 12
mg significantly improved HbA1c levels by 2%
(17 mmol/mol) and achieved a 16.9% decrease in
body weight compared with a 0.01% (~0.1 mmol/
mol) reduction in HbA1c and a 3% reduction in
body weight in the placebo group.45
Effects of other blood glucose-lowering
therapies on weight
With the limited availability and affordability of
BGL medications with established weight loss
potential in many countries throughout the
world, particularly incretin-based therapies, a
key strategy for Basic Care is to preferentially
use BGL therapies with minimal negative
impact on weight. In these settings, nutrition
education at diagnosis and throughout the care
process is particularly important for mitigating
weight gain.
The effects of BGL therapies on body weight vary
both between and within drug classes. Sodiumglucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors are
associated with weight loss and their global
availability is improving. Metformin results in a
small weight loss; dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4)
inhibitors and α-glucosidase inhibitors are
considered weight-neutral; and glitazones are
associated with weight gain.46
As a class, sulfonylurea monotherapy is
associated with a weight gain of approximately
2.0 kg.46 However, weight change has been
reported to be limited in other longer-term
studies. In the ADVANCE study, mean body
weight with gliclazide during the RCT followup period was 0.7 kg greater in the intensive
control group than in the standard control
group,47 but only 0.1 kg over five years in the
post-trial.48 The RECORD trial showed that weight
was not increased in those randomised to dual
therapy with metformin and a sulfonylurea.49
The TOSCA study showed that dual metformin
and sulfonylurea therapy was associated with
an initial small weight gain in the first year,
returning to baseline weight over five years.50
Globally, sulfonylureas remain an important
option, either as monotherapy or more
commonly as combination therapy. While
concerns remain about the risk of
hypoglycaemia and weight gain with some
sulfonylureas, newer agents (such as glimepiride
and gliclazide) are associated with better
safety profiles and continue to be promoted in
guidelines, especially in combination with other
BGL therapies.51,52
REFERENCES
1. Obesity and type 2 diabetes: a joint approach
to halt the rise. A policy brief by the
International Diabetes Federation and the
World Obesity Federation. Available from:
https://www.idf.org/media/uploads/2022/11/
IDF-WOF-Obesity-and-type-2-diabetes_A-jointapproach-to-halt-the-rise-WEB-2.pdf [Accessed
September 2024].
2. World Obesity Federation. Missing the 2025
Global Targets. Available from: https://www.
worldobesity.org [Accessed September 2024].
3. World Obesity Federation. World Obesity Atlas
2022. Available from: http://s3-eu-west-1.
amazonaws.com/wof-files/World_Obesity_
Atlas_2022.pdf [Accessed September 2024].
4. International Diabetes Federation (IDF). IDF
Diabetes Atlas. 11th edition. Brussels, Belgium:
International Diabetes Federation, 2025.
Available from: http://www.diabetesatlas.org.
5. Rubino F, Cummings DE, Eckel RH, et
al. Definition and diagnostic criteria of
clinical obesity. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2025;13(3):221-262.
6. World Health Organization (WHO) Expert
Consultation. Appropriate body-mass index
for Asian populations and its implications
for policy and intervention strategies. Lancet.
2004;363(9403):157-163. Erratum in: Lancet.
2004;363(9412):902.
7. Ross R, Neeland IJ, Yamashita S, et al. Waist
circumference as a vital sign in clinical
practice: a Consensus Statement from the IAS
and ICCR Working Group on Visceral Obesity.
Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2020;16(3):177-189.
8. Horn DB, Almandoz JP , Look M. What is
clinically relevant weight loss for your patients
and how can it be achieved? A narrative
review. Postgrad Med. 2022;134(4):359-375.
Chapter 5
9. Gummesson A, Nyman E, Knutsson M, et
al. Effect of weight reduction on glycated
haemoglobin in weight loss trials in patients
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2017;19(9):1295-1305.
10. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al.
Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes
with lifestyle intervention or metformin.
N Engl J Med. 2002;346(6):393-403.
11. Hamman RF, Wing RR, Edelstein SL, et
al. Effect of weight loss with lifestyle
intervention on risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2006;29(9):2102-2107.
12. Ryan DH, Yockey SR. Weight loss and
improvement in comorbidity: Differences
at 5%, 10%, 15%, and over. Curr Obes Rep.
2017;6(2):187-194.
13. Riddle MC, Cefalu WT, Evans PH, et
al. Consensus report: Definition and
interpretation of remission in type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2021;44(10):2438-2444.
14. Taheri S. Type 2 diabetes remission: A new
mission in diabetes care. Diabetes Care.
2024;47(1):47-49.
15. Holman N, Wild SH, Khunti K, et al. Incidence
and characteristics of remission of type 2
diabetes in England: A cohort study using
the National Diabetes Audit. Diabetes Care.
2022;45(5):1151-1161.
16. Lean MEJ, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al.
Durability of a primary care-led weightmanagement intervention for remission of
type 2 diabetes: 2-Year results of the DiRECT
open-label, cluster-randomised trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2019;7(5):344-355.
17. Gregg EW, Chen H, Wagenknecht LE, et
al. Association of an intensive lifestyle
intervention with remission of type 2 diabetes.
JAMA. 2012;308(23):2489-2496.
18. Lean ME, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al.
Primary care-led weight management for
remission of type 2 diabetes (DiRECT): An
open-label, cluster-randomised trial. Lancet.
2018;391(10120):541-551.
19. Taheri S, Zaghloul H, Chagoury O, et al.
Effect of intensive lifestyle intervention on
bodyweight and glycaemia in early type 2
diabetes (DIADEM-I): An open-label, parallelgroup, randomised controlled trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2020;8(6):477-489.
20. Sattar N, Welsh P , Leslie WS, et al. Dietary
weight-management for type 2 diabetes
remissions in South Asians: The South Asian
diabetes remission randomised trial for proofof-concept and feasibility (STANDby). Lancet
Reg Health Southeast Asia. 2023;9:100111.
21. Hocking SL, Markovic TP , Lee CMY, et al.
Intensive lifestyle intervention for remission
of early type 2 diabetes in primary care
in Australia: DiRECT-Aus. Diabetes Care.
2024;47(1):66-70.
22. Lean ME, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al. 5-year
follow-up of the randomised Diabetes
Remission Clinical Trial (DiRECT) of continued
support for weight loss maintenance in
the UK: an extension study. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2024;12(4):233-246.
23. Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al.
Bariatric surgery versus conventional medical
therapy for type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2012;366(17):1577-1585.
24. Schauer PR, Kashyap SR, Wolski K, et al.
Bariatric surgery versus intensive medical
therapy in obese patients with diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2012;366(17):1567-1576.
25. Kirwan JP , Courcoulas AP , Cummings DE,
et al. Diabetes remission in the Alliance
of Randomized Trials of Medicine versus
Metabolic Surgery in Type 2 Diabetes (ARMMST2D). Diabetes Care. 2022;45(7):1574-1583.
26. Yang Y, Miao C, Wang Y, et al. The long-term
effect of bariatric/metabolic surgery versus
pharmacologic therapy in type 2 diabetes
mellitus patients: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev.
2024;40(5):e3830.
27. Affinati AH, Esfandiari NH, Oral EA, et al.
Bariatric surgery in the treatment of type 2
diabetes. Curr Diab Rep. 2019;19(12):156.
28. Yan YX, Wang GF, Xu N, et al. Correlation
between postoperative weight loss and
diabetes mellitus remission: A meta-analysis.
Obes Surg. 2014;24(11):1862-1869.
29. Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al.
Bariatric-metabolic surgery versus conventional
medical treatment in obese patients with type
2 diabetes: 5 Year follow-up of an open-label,
single-centre, randomised controlled trial.
Lancet. 2015;386(9997):964-973.
30. Wing RR, Bolin P , Brancati FL, et al.
Cardiovascular effects of intensive lifestyle
intervention in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2013;369(2):145-154.
31. Knowler WC, Bahnson JL, Bantle JP , et al.
Effect of a long-term behavioural weight loss
intervention on nephropathy in overweight
or obese adults with type 2 diabetes: A
secondary analysis of the Look AHEAD
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
WEIGHT CONTROL
randomised clinical trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2014;2(10):801-809.
32. Look AHEAD Research Group. Effects of a
long-term lifestyle modification programme on
peripheral neuropathy in overweight or obese
adults with type 2 diabetes: The Look AHEAD
study. Diabetologia. 2017;60(6):980-988.
33. Gregg EW, Chen H, Bancks MP , et al. Impact
of remission from type 2 diabetes on longterm health outcomes: Findings from the Look
AHEAD study. Diabetologia. 2024;67(3):459-469.
34. Gregg EW, Jakicic JM, Blackburn G, et al.
Association of the magnitude of weight
loss and changes in physical fitness with
long-term cardiovascular disease outcomes
in overweight or obese people with type 2
diabetes: A post-hoc analysis of the Look
AHEAD randomised clinical trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4(11):913-921.
35. Wu T, Wong CKH, Lui DTW, et al. Bariatric
surgery, novel glucose-lowering agents,
and insulin for type 2 diabetes and
obesity: Bayesian network meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. BJS Open.
2023;7(4):zrad077.
36. Wilding JPH, Batterham RL, Calanna S,
et al. Once-weekly semaglutide in adults
with overweight or obesity. N Engl J Med.
2021;384(11):989-1002.
37. Davies M, Færch L, Jeppesen OK, et al.
Semaglutide 2·4 mg once a week in adults
with overweight or obesity, and type 2
diabetes (STEP 2): A randomised, double-blind,
double-dummy, placebo-controlled, phase 3
trial. Lancet. 2021;397(10278):971-984.
38. Husain M, Birkenfeld AL, Donsmark M, et
al. Oral semaglutide and cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2019;381(9):841-851.
39. Kosiborod MN, Petrie MC, Borlaug BA, et al.
Semaglutide in patients with obesity-related
heart failure and type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2024;390(15):1394-1407.
40. Frías JP , Davies MJ, Rosenstock J, et al.
Tirzepatide versus semaglutide once weekly
in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2021;385(6):503-515.
41. Garvey WT, Frias JP , Jastreboff AM, et al.
Tirzepatide once weekly for the treatment
of obesity in people with type 2 diabetes
(SURMOUNT-2): A double-blind, randomised,
multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
Lancet. 2023;402(10402):613-626.
42. Aronne LJ, Sattar N, Horn DB, et al. Continued
treatment With tirzepatide for maintenance
of weight reduction in adults with obesity: The
SURMOUNT-4 randomized clinical trial. JAMA.
2024;331(1):38-48.
43. Nicholls SJ, Bhatt DL, Buse JB, et al.
Comparison of tirzepatide and dulaglutide
on major adverse cardiovascular events
in participants with type 2 diabetes and
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease:
SURPASS-CVOT design and baseline
characteristics. Am Heart J. 2024;267:1-11.
44. Jastreboff AM, Kaplan LM, Frías JP , et al.
Triple-hormone-receptor agonist retatrutide
for obesity - a phase 2 trial. N Engl J Med.
2023;389(6):514-526.
45. Rosenstock J, Frias J, Jastreboff AM, et al.
Retatrutide, a GIP , GLP-1 and glucagon
receptor agonist, for people with type 2
diabetes: A randomised, double-blind,
placebo and active-controlled, parallel-group,
phase 2 trial conducted in the USA. Lancet.
2023;402(10401):529-544.
46. Apovian CM, Okemah J, O’Neil PM. Body
weight considerations in the management of
type 2 diabetes. Adv Ther. 2019;36(1):44-58.
47. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.
Intensive blood glucose control and vascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2008;358(24):2560-2572.
48. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Kengne AP , et al. The
efficacy of lowering glycated haemoglobin
with a gliclazide modified release-based
intensive glucose lowering regimen in
the ADVANCE trial. Diabetes Res Clin Pract.
2010;89(2):126-133.
49. Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, et al.
Rosiglitazone evaluated for cardiovascular
outcomes in oral agent combination therapy
for type 2 diabetes (RECORD): a multicentre,
randomised, open-label trial. Lancet.
2009;373(9681):2125-2135.
50. Vaccaro O, Masulli M, Nicolucci A, et al.
Effects on the incidence of cardiovascular
events of the addition of pioglitazone versus
sulfonylureas in patients with type 2 diabetes
inadequately controlled with metformin
(TOSCA.IT): A randomised, multicentre trial.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(11):887-897.
51. Kalra S, Bahendeka S, Sahay R, et al.
Consensus recommendations on sulfonylurea
and sulfonylurea combinations in the
management of type 2 diabetes mellitus International Task Force. Indian J Endocrinol
Chapter 5
Metab. 2018;22(1):132-157.
52. Al-Saleh Y, Sabico S, Al-Furqani A, et al.
Sulfonylureas in the current practice of
type 2 diabetes management: Are they
all the same? Consensus from the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) countries advisory
board on sulfonylureas. Diabetes Ther.
2021;12(8):2115-2132. Erratum in: Diabetes
Ther. 2021;12(8):2265-2266.
Cardio-Renal Protection
in Type 2 Diabetes
Chapter 6
CARDIO-RENAL PROTECTION
Chapter 6
RECOMMENDATIONS
Optimal Care Basic Care
Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease (ASCVD)
Screening/risk
assessment
• History of ASCVD
• High-risk assessment
- Age plus 2 risk factors
- CVD risk score
Management
• Glycaemic control
• Risk factor control
• Blood pressure/lipid control
• Consider aspirin
• SGLT2i or GLP-1RA
• Consider SGLT2i and GLP-1RA
• Glycaemic control
• Risk factor control
• Blood pressure/lipid control
• Consider aspirin
• SGLT2i*
Heart Failure (HF)
Screening/risk
assessment
• Symptoms
• Hospitalisation for HF
• ECG
• Echocardiography
• Risk score
• Biomarkers
- BNP / NT-proBNP
• Symptoms
• Hospitalisation for HF
• ECG
• Risk score
Management
• Glycaemic control
• Risk factor control
• Blood pressure/lipid control
• ACEi or ARB
• Beta-blockers
• Metformin+SGLT2i
• Consider adding a non-steroidal MRA
• Consider adding GLP-1RA/tirzepatide
in obese individuals
• Glycaemic control
• Risk factor control
• Blood pressure/lipid control
• ACEi or ARB
• Beta-blockers
• Metformin+SGLT2i*
• Consider adding a steroidal MRA
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
Screening/risk
assessment
• eGFR
• UACR
Management
• Glycaemic control
• Risk factor control
• Blood pressure/lipid control
• ACEi or ARB
• SGLT2i
• Consider adding semaglutide
• Glycaemic control
• Risk factor control
• Blood pressure/lipid control
• ACEi or ARB
• SGLT2i*
* SGLT2 inhibitors are increasingly available in several low- and middle-income countries at generally affordable cost.
ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin II receptor blocker; BNP/NT-proBNP , b-type natriuretic
peptide/N- terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide; CVD, cardiovascular disease; ECG, electrocardiogram; eGFR, estimated
glomerular filtration rate; GLP-1RA, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; HF, heart failure; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonist; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor; UACR, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
CARDIO-RENAL PROTECTION
o Diabetes complications result from a complex interplay of hyperglycaemia,
cardiometabolic risk factors (e.g., elevated blood pressure and lipids), obesity, and
unhealthy lifestyle behaviours.
o Cardio-renal complications, including atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD),
heart failure (HF), and chronic kidney disease (CKD), are major drivers of premature
mortality and morbidity in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
o Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is highly prevalent in T2DM, around 30% overall, with
significant rates of coronary artery disease, silent myocardial infarctions, and HF; CKD
affects around 40% of individuals, with marked ethnic differences.
o Early and regular screening for CVD (using risk scores, symptom assessment,
electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and biomarkers) and CKD (estimated
glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] and urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio) is critical
for timely intervention.
o A multi-pillar management approach is essential, focusing on glycaemic control, risk factor
modification (blood pressure and lipid management, smoking cessation, weight control),
and use of proven cardio-renal protective therapies.
o Newer blood glucose lowering agents, especially SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor
agonists, have demonstrated robust benefits in reducing adverse cardio-renal outcomes.
o SGLT2 inhibitors consistently reduce risks of kidney disease progression, HF
hospitalisations, and cardiovascular death across diverse groups with T2DM.
o GLP-1 receptor agonists reduce major adverse cardiovascular events, all-cause mortality,
and composite kidney outcomes.
o Other glucose lowering therapies (metformin, sulfonylureas, DPP4 inhibitors, insulin)
generally have neutral cardio-renal effects while thiazolidinediones increase HF risk.
o Non-steroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (e.g., finerenone) further expand
options for reducing cardio-renal risk in T2DM.
o Global challenges, especially in low resource settings, limit availability and access to
comprehensive screening and optimal medications to reduce cardio-renal risk.
o A structured, multi-pillar treatment approach that integrates both traditional and novel
therapies is recommended to improve cardio-renal outcomes in people with T2DM.
KEY POINTS
Chapter 6
BACKGROUND
Diabetes complications are the result of a complex
interplay of hyperglycaemia, cardiometabolic
risk factors such as elevated blood pressure
and lipids, obesity, and an unhealthy lifestyle
(diet, physical inactivity, smoking). In addition,
some complications increase the risk of other
complications, with chronic kidney disease (CKD)
associated with an increased risk of all-cause and
cardiovascular (CVD) mortality, CVD events, and
hospitalisation with heart failure (HF).1
This Chapter focuses on cardio-renal protection,
a major driver of premature mortality and
significant morbidity in people with type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (Figure 6.1).
Minimising cardio-renal complications requires
effective and regular screening to detect CVD
and CKD, and early comprehensive intervention,
including consideration of newer blood glucoselowering (BGL) medications with established
cardio-renal protection (sodium-glucose
cotransporter-2 [SGLT2] inhibitors and glucagonlike peptide-1 [GLP-1] receptor agonists)1
in the context of the key pillars in diabetes
management (Figure 6.2).
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
In low resource settings, particularly in low- and
middle-income countries, access, availability, and
affordability of comprehensive Optimal Care for
screening and management of cardio-renal risk
is often limited. This includes healthcare services,
qualified healthcare professionals, diagnostic tests,
and availability and affordability of medications.
For example, in 125 surveyed countries, fewer
than one in four had facilities available for routine
measurements of serum creatinine or proteinuria
and there was considerable interregional and
intraregional variability.2
A broad range of medications is available on
the World Health Organization (WHO) Essential
Medicines List (EML) for managing cardiorenal risk, including angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor
blockers (ARBs), beta-blockers, diuretics, and
spironolactone.3 While this does not guarantee
local availability, the WHO EML serves as a
platform for lobbying local policy makers
to have these medications on the country’s
national EML. As described in Chapter 3 on noninsulin glucose-lowering medications, while
access to these medications is limited globally,
MASLD, Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease; MASH, Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis; PVD,
peripheral vascular disease.
Figure 6.1 Diabetes-associated complications
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
CARDIO-RENAL PROTECTION
the range is increasing in many countries,
including generic and affordable SGLT2
inhibitors. However, if Optimal Care cannot
be achieved, implementing programmes to
achieve Basic Care standards have the potential
to significantly reduce cardio-renal risk and
improve outcomes for people with T2DM.
EVIDENCE SUMMARY
Prevalence of CVD and CKD in people
with T2DM
T2DM increases the risk of developing
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
(ASCVD), HF, CKD, and risk of premature
death compared with those without T2DM. 4 A
recent systematic review of over four million
individuals with T2DM reported an overall
CVD prevalence of 32.2%; 29.1% with coronary
artery disease (CAD), 14.9% HF, 14.6% angina,
10.0% myocardial infarction (MI), and 7.6%
stroke.5 CVD was the cause of death in 9.9%,
representing 50.3% of all deaths. 5
In a real-world study in primary care of 123,261
individuals (9,616 with T2DM), 43.7% presented
with ASCVD and/or CKD and/or HF: 34.8%
ASCVD, 4.0% HF, and 14.6% CKD.6 Asymptomatic
CVD is common in T2DM with approximately one
in three individuals experiencing undetected
ischaemic episodes.7 The UKPDS study reported
a prevalence of around 20% of “silent” MI in
people with T2DM.8
Heart failure is an important but underrecognised risk factor for adverse outcomes
in people with T2DM and has often been
overlooked compared with prevention of
ASCVD. HF represents a substantial global
burden with significant unmet needs in terms
of morbidity and mortality. A meta-analysis of
43 studies established diabetes as a significant
adverse factor linked to long-term survival and
hospitalisation risk in both acute and chronic
HF.9 In a 2016 cross-sectional study, 26.4% of US
nursing home residents aged 65 or older with
T2DM had HF.10 HF is not only common in T2DM
but is preventable and treatable.
CKD affects approximately 40% of individuals
with T2DM overall but prevalence varies with
age, ethnic background, duration of diabetes,
and presence of cardiometabolic risk factors.11
CKD in individuals with T2DM has remained
consistently high at approximately 40% from
2007 to 2012.12 There are significant ethnic
disparities with higher rates among Black and
Mexican-American populations. Alarmingly, one
in four persons under age 65 with T2DM has
CKD, underscoring the need to improve early
detection and management.12
The intricate relationship between T2DM, CVD,
and CKD is highlighted in a cross-sectional
multicentre study of individuals with T2DM from
the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait, in whom
CKD prevalence was 44.3%, followed by CVD
(17.3%) and CAD (15%), with a discernible male
predilection. Co-prevalence of CVD and CKD was
common (11.7%), and a longer duration of T2DM
correlated with heightened risks of CVD, CAD,
and peripheral artery disease.13
Individuals with T2DM without known cardiorenal disease have an 80% lifetime risk of
developing CVD or renal events: a 54% risk of
CKD; 41% risk of CVD death; 29% risk of HF; 20%
risk of stroke; 19% risk of MI; and 9% risk of
peripheral vascular disease (PVD). Achieving ideal
CVD health could potentially reduce risks by 37%
if evidence-based interventions for reducing CVD
associated with T2DM were more widely used.14
Figure 6.2 Key pillars of diabetes management
Chapter 6
Screening for CVD and CKD in people with
T2DM
The availability of effective therapeutic options
to prevent and reduce adverse cardio-renal
outcomes underscores the importance of
screening and early detection for both CVD
and CKD in people with T2DM. The following
is an overview of approaches for assessing
cardio-renal risk. While access will vary across
countries and health systems, it is important for
each health service to develop local criteria for
assessing and defining cardio-renal risk and to
implement management strategies.
CVD screening and risk assessment
(i) ASCVD – established event and/or high-risk
a. Established ASCVD traditionally includes
those who have had an MI, stroke, or
a revascularisation procedure. Some
definitions also include a transient ischaemic
attack, angina, amputation, PVD.
b. High CVD risk can be assessed using
a formal CVD risk score or by clinical
characteristics (e.g., age plus 2 additional
risk factors such as smoking, elevated blood
pressure, dyslipidaemia).15
Screening should include routine questions for
symptoms of ASCVD. Risk assessment in people
with T2DM should be considered from age 40 years.
(ii) Heart failure
a. Symptoms of HF, hospitalisation for HF
b. Electrocardiogram (ECG / EKG)
c. Echocardiography with measurement of
ejection fraction
d. Biomarkers – natriuretic peptides (b-type
natriuretic peptide [BNP] and N-terminal
pro-b-type natriuretic peptide [NT-proBNP]).
BNP or NT-proBNP are biomarkers which
are surrogates for intracardiac volumes
and filling pressures. Screening protocols
using these biomarkers and cut-off values
are not universally agreed, require further
validation, and are currently not widely
available in routine clinical practice.16-20
Screening should include routine questions
for symptoms of HF. There is no consensus
on routine screening for HF but some suggest
formal assessment for HF should commence at
least from five years post-T2DM diagnosis.21
CKD screening and risk assessment
Renal function should be assessed by measuring
the following:
1. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)
2. Urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR)
The primary biomarkers for CKD are eGFR
and UACR.22 Normal albuminuria is defined as
less than 30 mg/g of creatinine (3 mg/mmol),
30–300 mg/g (3–30 mg/mmol) as moderately
increased albuminuria, and greater than
300 mg/g (30 mg/mmol) as severely increased
albuminuria. An eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m 2
signifies impaired renal function.
Figure 6.3, shown on the next page, illustrates
the Kidney Disease – Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO) classification of CKD based on eGFR and
UACR and the associated level of risk. Higher
categories of CKD, characterised by lower GFR
and greater albuminuria, independently increase
risk for adverse outcomes which include CKD
progression, CVD, all-cause and CVD mortality,
HF, kidney failure, and acute kidney injury.23
Annual screening is recommended for CKD
starting at diagnosis of T2DM because evidence
of CKD is often present already at diagnosis.
Management of CVD and CKD in people
with T2DM
The key pillars for reducing cardio-renal
risk follow the same principles for diabetes
complications in general (Figure 6.2), adapted
according to local availability and affordability
of specific therapies in developing and
implementing a personalised treatment plan.
Pillars of management to improve cardiorenal outcomes in people with T2DM
1. Glycaemic control
The importance of early and intensive glycaemic
control is considered in Chapter 3 on non-insulin
glucose-lowering medications; meta-analyses
of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have
confirmed that intensive glucose control reduces
the risk of CVD, retinopathy, and nephropathy.24,25
2. Risk factor control
This is an essential and routine pillar of
diabetes care and cardio-renal risk protection
irrespective of other interventions and is of
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
CARDIO-RENAL PROTECTION
added relevance when access and availability
to newer therapies are limited. Modifiable risk
factors include blood pressure control, lipid
control, smoking cessation, and management
of obesity or overweight.
A comprehensive review of the complete
spectrum of risk factor control is outside the
scope of these clinical recommendations but
can be found elsewhere.15,23,26 The following
is a summary of key points relevant to blood
pressure and lipid control.
(i) Blood pressure control26
• Hypertension is common among people with
T2DM, is a major risk factor for ASCVD, HF,
and CKD, and its treatment reduces cardiorenal complications.
• An elevated blood pressure is defined as a
systolic blood pressure (SBP) 120–129 mmHg
and a diastolic blood pressure (DBP)
<80 mmHg and hypertension as a SBP ≥130
mmHg or a DBP ≥80 mmHg.
• Blood pressure should be measured at every
routine clinical visit.
• The treatment goal is a blood pressure
<130/80 mmHg, if it can be safely attained.
• ACE inhibitors or ARBs are recommended
first-line therapy for hypertension in people
with T2DM with or at risk of cardio-renal
complications.
• Multiple-drug therapy is often required to
achieve blood pressure targets.
• Combinations of ACE inhibitors and ARBs and
combinations of ACE inhibitors or ARBs with
direct renin inhibitors should not be used.
• An ACE inhibitor or ARB is recommended
first-line treatment for hypertension in
people with diabetes and elevated UACR.
The benefits of tighter blood pressure control
were confirmed in a recent study in people
with T2DM which reported a significantly lower
incidence of major CVD events (composite of
non-fatal stroke, non-fatal MI, treatment or
hospitalisation for HF, or death from CVD) with
intensive treatment targeting a SBP of
<120 mmHg compared with standard treatment
targeting a SBP of <140 mmHg.27
(ii) Lipids26
• Lipid should be measured at T2DM
diagnosis and annually.
• Target low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol goals are <1.8 mmol/L (70 mg/dL)
for primary prevention and <1.4mmol/L (55
mg/dL) for secondary prevention.
• Statins are first-choice pharmacotherapy
Figure 6.3 KDIGO nomenclature for chronic kidney disease23
CKD, chronic kidney disease;
GFR, glomerular filtration rate;
KDIGO, Kidney Disease
– Improving Global Outcomes.
Chapter 6
for primary and secondary prevention
with other therapies considered if LDL
cholesterol goal is not met on statins or if
intolerant to statins.
• KDIGO recommends statins in adults with
T2DM aged 18–49 years with CKD if not
treated with chronic dialysis or kidney
transplantation.23
• Hypertriglyceridemia should be addressed
as required.
3. Other standard therapies
(i) ACE inhibitors or ARBs
KDIGO recommends starting an ACE inhibitor
or ARB for people with CKD and T2DM and
moderately-to-severely increased albuminuria
(G1–G4, A2 and A3 – Figure 6.3) but avoiding any
combination of ACE inhibitors, ARB, and direct
renin inhibitor therapy.23
(ii) Beta-blockers
Beta-blockers are effective in reducing allcause death and hospitalisation for HF in
people with HF with reduced ejection fraction
(HFrEF) with diabetes. 15
4. Blood glucose-lowering therapies
(i) SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists
There is now compelling evidence of specific
cardio-renal protection with SGLT2 inhibitors
and GLP-1 receptor agonists. Consequently,
these agents should be considered as
mainstream therapies for people with T2DM
with or at increased cardio-renal risk and
their use has become a key pillar of managing
cardio-renal risk. 28
SGLT2 inhibitors
SGLT2 inhibitors have clearly demonstrated
benefits across the spectrum of cardio-renal
outcomes. The weight of current evidence
favours these agents in people with T2DM at
high risk or with established HF or CKD.
In a meta-analysis of six studies of 46,969
individuals with T2DM, including 66% with
ASCVD, SGLT2 inhibitors were associated with a
10% reduced risk of major adverse CVD events,
32% reduced risk of hospitalisation for HF, and
38% reduction in adverse kidney outcomes. The
largest benefit across the SGLT2 inhibitor class
was risk reduction for hospitalisation for HF and
adverse kidney outcomes.29
A meta-analysis of 13 studies with 90,409
participants (82.7% with T2DM) compared SGLT2
inhibitors with placebo. SGLT2 inhibitors reduced
the risk of kidney disease progression by 37% and
reduced the risk of CVD death or hospitalisation
for HF by 23%. The risk reduction was similar
in individuals with and without diabetes and
irrespective of mean baseline eGFR.30
A meta-analysis of 48 studies involving 58,165
people with T2DM demonstrated that SGLT2
inhibitors were associated with significant
reductions in UACR and reduced the risk of
microalbuminuria by 31% and macroalbuminuria
by 51% compared with placebo or active
comparators.31 The EMPA KIDNEY study showed
that empagliflozin slowed the progression of
impaired glomerular filtration in people with or
without T2DM, and with or without albuminuria.32
A meta-analysis of four heart failure studies
(n = 15,684 participants, 42%–100% with
T2DM), four trials in people with T2DM at high
ASCVD (n = 42,568), and three trials in CKD
(n = 19,289 participants, 68%–100% T2DM)
reported significantly better outcomes with
SGLT2 inhibitors compared with placebo:
23% reduced risk of hospitalisation for HF
or CVD death, 14% reduced CVD death, 36%
less kidney disease progression, and a 12%
reduction in all-cause mortality. 33
In five trials of 21,947 people with HF, SGLT2
inhibitors reduced the risk of composite CVD
death or hospitalisation for HF by 23%, CVD
death by 13%, first hospitalisation for HF by 28%,
and all-cause mortality by 8%. These outcomes
for each endpoint were consistently observed
in HF with mildly reduced or preserved ejection
fraction and results were similar in those with
and without diabetes.34
GLP-1 receptor agonists
A recent meta-analysis of 11 trials involving
67,769 people with T2DM examined the cardiorenal effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists versus
placebo. Composite renal outcome was reduced
by 18%, kidney failure by 16%, major adverse
cardiovascular events (MACE) by 13%, and allcause mortality by 12%. Overall hospitalisation
for HF was reduced by 13% but no baseline
information was available on HF status or
ejection fraction. Risk of serious adverse events
was similar but treatment discontinuation due
to adverse events was 51% higher with GLP-1
receptor agonists.35
A meta-analysis of 13 cardiovascular outcome
trials (CVOTs; 83,258 people with and without
diabetes) examined the effects of GLP-1
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
CARDIO-RENAL PROTECTION
receptor agonists versus placebo. GLP1 receptor agonists significantly reduced
MACE by 14%, all-cause mortality by 13%, CV
mortality by 13%, fatal stroke by 26%, non-fatal
stroke by 13%, coronary revascularisation by
14%, and composite kidney outcome by 24%.
These effects were independent of sex, CVD
history, body mass index (BMI), and eGFR.
GLP-1 receptor agonists did not significantly
reduce fatal or non-fatal MI, hospitalisation for
unstable angina, or HF hospitalisation. 36
Until recently, the renal effects of GLP-1 receptor
agonists have been derived from secondary and
post-hoc kidney outcomes analysis in clinical
trials of GLP-1 receptor agonists for CVD and
glycaemic control studies. The FLOW study is the
first dedicated study comparing a GLP-1 receptor
agonist (semaglutide 1.0 mg once weekly) and
placebo in people with T2DM and CKD. The study
was ceased early after a prespecified interim
analysis demonstrated a 24% reduction in the
composite primary outcome with semaglutide.
Benefits were observed in the composite of
the kidney-specific components of the primary
outcome (21% reduction) and CVD death (29%
reduction). The results of all confirmatory
secondary outcomes also favoured semaglutide.37
To date, no clinical trial has specifically
evaluated the efficacy of GLP-1 receptor
agonists on CVD outcomes in people with T2DM
and heart failure. The STEP-HFpEF DM Trial
randomised people with T2DM and HF with
preserved ejection fraction and a BMI ≥30 to
receive once-weekly semaglutide (2.4 mg) or
placebo for 52 weeks. The primary HF endpoint
was change from baseline in the Kansas
City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire clinical
summary score. Semaglutide resulted in larger
reductions in heart failure-related symptoms
and physical limitations. 38
The cardiovascular outcome SUSTAIN-6 study
noted an increase in retinopathy.39 A dedicated
RCT of semaglutide versus placebo (FOCUSNCT03811561) to assess the impact on retinopathy
in people with T2DM is due to report in 2026.40
Combination SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor
agonists
No clinical trial has studied combinations of
SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists on
cardio-renal outcomes in people with T2DM and
CKD. However, some indirect data are available.
A meta-analysis of 13 real-world observational
studies examined combinations of SGLT2
inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists in people
with T2DM. The combination was associated
with a 51% significantly lower all-cause mortality
compared with individual therapies and
significant reductions in weight, SBP , and HbA1c.
However, the study had a number of limitations,
with the authors concluding that the certainty of
evidence was deemed to be low-to-very low by
the GRADE criteria.41
In a prespecified analysis, the FLOW trial
examined the overall benefits of semaglutide on
kidney and CVD outcomes in people with T2DM
and CKD in relation to baseline users (n = 550)
and non-users (n = 2,983) of SGLT2 inhibitors
and reported that outcomes were not influenced
by the concomitant use of SGLT2 inhibitors.
However, the power of the analysis was limited
by the low use of SGLT2 inhibitors at trial entry
and that more participants initiated SGLT2
inhibitors in the placebo group during the trial.42
(ii) Tirzepatide
Tirzepatide is a long-acting agonist of glucosedependent insulinotropic polypeptide and
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptors, which results
in considerable weight loss. To date, clinical trial
data are lacking with respect to its effects on
cardio-renal outcomes. The SURPASS-CVOT study
is currently examining the cardiovascular safety
and efficacy of tirzepatide compared with the
GLP-1 receptor agonist dulaglutide in with T2DM43
The SUMMIT trial randomised people with HF
and preserved ejection fraction (48% with T2DM)
and BMI ≥ 30 to receive tirzepatide (up to 15
mg subcutaneously once per week) or placebo.
After a median follow-up 104 weeks, CVD death
or a worsening HF event was reduced by 38%
(worsening HF events by 46%) and health status
was improved in the tirzepatide group compared
with placebo group.44
(iii) Effects of other blood glucose-lowering
therapies on cardio-renal outcomes
The following is a brief summary of the cardiorenal effects of other BGL therapies. Overall
cardio-renal effects have been neutral (except
for increased risk of HF with thiazolidinediones),
suggesting that these agents can be used when
required to improve glycaemic control.
Metformin
The cardio-renal effects of metformin have not
been studied in a dedicated CVOT. While the
UKPDS showed beneficial effects of metformin
on long-term diabetes outcomes, the primary
focus of the RCT component of the UKPDS was
Chapter 6
on comparing intensive with less intensive
diabetes control. The UKPDS included a nested
RCT of 753 overweight or obese people with
T2DM, comparing conventional glucose targets
with a policy of intensive glucose lowering with
metformin.45 Metformin reduced MI by 39%,
coronary death by 50%, and stroke by 41% over
a median period of 10.7 years. Post-trial followup after 24 years showed that early intensive
glycaemic control with metformin therapy
compared with conventional glycaemic control
resulted in 20% risk reduction in all-cause
mortality and a 31% reduction in MI.46
Sulfonylureas
CVD outcomes with sulfonylureas has been
studied in two RCTs. The ADVANCE study
examined gliclazide in the context of intensified
glycaemic control and did not show any CVD
benefits or harms.47 Similarly, the post-trial
follow-up ADVANCE-ON study observed no
differences in risk of death from any cause or
major macrovascular events.48
The dedicated CAROLINA CVOT compared CVD
outcomes in people with T2DM randomised
to the DPP4 inhibitor, linagliptin, and the
sulfonylurea, glimepiride, in addition to usual
care. The primary outcome of time to first
occurrence of CVD death, non-fatal MI, or
non-fatal stroke over a follow-up period of 6.3
years was not different between the two groups
but hypoglycaemia was more common in the
sulfonylurea group.49
In the UKPDS in individuals with newly
diagnosed T2DM, the sulfonylureas
chlorpropamide and glibenclamide/glyburide
had no statistically significant effects on CV
outcomes and equally did not suggest adverse
CVD effects of sulfonylureas.50
Alpha glucosidase inhibitors
There is no dedicated CVOT with an alpha
glucosidase inhibitor (AGI) in people with T2DM.
The ACE study examined the effect of the AGI
acarbose on CVD outcomes in people with
CAD and impaired glucose tolerance and failed
to show a difference in outcomes between
acarbose and placebo.51
Thiazolidinediones
The RECORD study assessed CV outcomes in
people with T2DM after addition of rosiglitazone
to either metformin or sulfonylurea compared
with the combination of the two. Rosiglitazone
did not increase the risk of overall CVD morbidity
or mortality although there was a possible
increase in MI compared with standard glucoselowering therapies.52
The PROACTIVE CVOT assessed the CVD effects
of pioglitazone versus placebo in individuals
with T2DM and ASCVD and failed to show a
statistically significant effect on the primary
composite outcome.53
The thiazolidinediones pioglitazone and
rosiglitazone are associated with increased risk
of HF.
DPP4 inhibitors
Four CVOTs in people with T2DM with or at
high risk of ASCVD have assessed the CVD
effects of DPP4 inhibitors versus placebo
and demonstrated non-inferiority but not
superiority of DPP4 inhibition in the primary CVD
endpoint.54-57 The SAVOR-TIMI 53 study showed
that saxagliptin significantly increased the risk of
hospitalisation for HF versus placebo.58
Insulin
Two basal insulins have been formally
evaluated in dedicated CVOTs and did not show
a difference in CVD outcomes. The ORIGIN
study of insulin glargine included individuals
at high CVD risk with impaired fasting glucose,
impaired glucose tolerance, or T2DM. After a
median follow-up of 6.2 years, the incidence of
CV outcomes did not differ between the insulin
glargine and standard care groups.59
The DEVOTE trial randomised individuals with
T2DM with ASCVD or with a high CVD risk
to once daily insulin degludec versus insulin
glargine. There was no significant difference in
the primary composite of CVD death, non-fatal
MI, or non-fatal stroke between the two groups
after a median 1.8 years follow-up.60
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists
a. Steroidal mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonists (MRAs) spironolactone
or eplerenone reduce death and HF
hospitalisation in people with HFrEF,
with consistent results in people with or
without diabetes. Caution is required when
using MRAs in people with impaired renal
function and in those with serum potassium
concentration >5.0 mmol/L.15 The efficacy of
these agents in people with HF and mildly
reduced or preserved ejection fraction has
not been established.
b. Non-steroidal MRA – finerenone
The placebo-controlled FIDELIO-DKD61 and
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
CARDIO-RENAL PROTECTION
FIGARO-DKD62 trials demonstrated that
finerenone reduced risk of kidney failure
and CVD outcomes (CVD death, non-fatal MI,
non-fatal stroke, or hospitalisation for HF)
in people with CKD and T2DM who were on
maximum doses of ACE inhibitors or ARBs.63
Finerenone has also been shown to further
improve renal function in people with CKD
and T2DM already receiving SGLT2 inhibitors
at baseline64 and cardio-renal outcomes in
people with CKD and T2DM irrespective of
SGLT2 inhibitor use.65
A recent outcome study reported that
in people with HF and mildly reduced or
preserved ejection fraction (41% of whom
had T2DM), finerenone resulted in a
significantly lower rate of a composite of
total worsening HF events and death from
CVD compared with placebo.66
Summary
The emergence of newer therapies has resulted
in a significant paradigm shift in the management
of cardio-renal risk through a structured, multipillar treatment approach to improve outcomes.
In addition to the traditional pillars of improving
glycaemic control and interventions for
established risk factors, the cardio-renal benefits
of SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1 receptor agonists,
and non-steroidal mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonists are supported by robust clinical
trial evidence.67 These therapies have expanded
standard CKD treatment with renin-angiotensin
system (RAS) blockers.68
Current guidelines15,26 include decision
algorithms which highlight established and
new pillars for managing cardio-renal risk and
enhance risk reduction for people with T2DM
with at least one of ASCVD, HF, CKD, or those at
high risk for ASCVD.26,69
REFERENCES
1. Ibrahim M, Ba-Essa EM, Baker J, et al.
Cardio-renal-metabolic disease in primary
care setting. Diabetes Metab Res Rev.
2024;40(3):e3755.
2. Bello AK, Levin A, Tonelli M, et al. Assessment
of global kidney health care status. JAMA.
2017;317(18):1864-1881.
3. World Health Organization. Web Annex A.
World Health Organization Model List of
Essential Medicines – 23rd List, 2023. In: The
selection and use of essential medicines 2023:
Executive summary of the report of the 24th
WHO Expert Committee on the Selection and
Use of Essential Medicines, 24 - 28 April 2023.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2023
(WHO/MHP/HPS/EML/2023.02).
4. Castro Conde A, Marzal Martín D, Campuzano
Ruiz R, et al. Comprehensive cardiovascular
and renal protection in patients with type 2
diabetes. J Clin Med. 2023;12(12):3925.
5. Einarson TR, Acs A, Ludwig C, et al. Prevalence
of cardiovascular disease in type 2 diabetes:
A systematic literature review of scientific
evidence from across the world in 2007-2017.
Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2018;17(1):83.
6. Goderis G, Vaes B, Mamouris P , et al.
Prevalence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease, heart failure, and chronic kidney
disease in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus: A primary care research networkbased study. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes.
2022;130(7):447-453.
7. Cohn PF, Fox KM, Daly C. Silent myocardial
ischemia. Circulation. 2003;108(10):1263-1277.
8. Davis TM, Coleman RL, Holman RR. Prognostic
significance of silent myocardial infarction
in newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus:
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study
(UKPDS) 79. Circulation. 2013;127(9):980-987.
9. Dauriz M, Mantovani A, Bonapace S, et al.
Prognostic impact of diabetes on longterm survival outcomes in patients with
heart failure: A meta-analysis. Diabetes Care.
2017;40(11):1597-1605.
10. Osundolire S, Naqvi S, Nunes AP , et al.
Heart failure among US nursing home
residents with diabetes mellitus. Int J Cardiol.
2022;349:138-143.
11. Skolnik NS, Style AJ. Importance of early
screening and diagnosis of chronic kidney
disease in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Ther. 2021;12(6):1613-1630.
12. Wu B, Bell K, Stanford A, et al. Understanding
CKD among patients with T2DM: Prevalence,
temporal trends, and treatment patternsNHANES 2007-2012. BMJ Open Diabetes Res
Care. 2016;4(1):e000154.
13. Al-Ozairi E, Jallo MK, Hafidh K, et al. Prevalence
of cardiovascular and renal co-morbidities
in patients with type 2 diabetes in the Gulf, a
cross-sectional observational study. Diabetes
Ther. 2021;12(4):1193-1207.
14. Zhang R, Mamza JB, Morris T, et al. Lifetime
Chapter 6
risk of cardiovascular-renal disease in type 2
diabetes: A population-based study in 473,399
individuals. BMC Med. 2022;20(1):63.
15. Marx N, Federici M, Schütt K, et al. 2023
ESC Guidelines for the management of
cardiovascular disease in patients with
diabetes. Eur Heart J. 2023;44(39):4043-4140.
16. Seferović P , Farmakis D, Bayes-Genis A, et
al. Biomarkers for the prediction of heart
failure and cardiovascular events in patients
with type 2 diabetes: A position statement
from the Heart Failure Association of the
European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart
Fail. 2022;24(7):1162-1170.
17. Mueller C, McDonald K, de Boer RA, et al.
Heart Failure Association of the European
Society of Cardiology practical guidance on
the use of natriuretic peptide concentrations.
Eur J Heart Fail. 2019;21(6):715-731.
18. Ceriello A, Catrinoiu D, Chandramouli C, et
al. Heart failure in type 2 diabetes: current
perspectives on screening, diagnosis
and management. Cardiovasc Diabetol.
2021;20(1):218.
19. Pop-Busui R, Januzzi JL, Bruemmer D, et
al. Heart failure: An underappreciated
complication of diabetes. A consensus report
of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care. 2022;45(7):1670-1690.
20. Bayes-Genis A, Docherty KF, Petrie MC, et
al. Practical algorithms for early diagnosis
of heart failure and heart stress using NTproBNP: A clinical consensus statement from
the Heart Failure Association of the ESC. Eur J
Heart Fail. 2023;25(11):1891-1898.
21. Packer M. Heart failure: The most important,
preventable, and treatable cardiovascular
complication of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2018;41(1):11-13.
22. ElSayed NA, Aleppo G, Aroda VR, et al.
11. Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk
Management: Standards of Care in
Diabetes-2023. Diabetes Care. 2023;46(Suppl
1):S191-S202.
23. Stevens PE, Ahmed SB, Carrero JJ, et al.
KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the
evaluation and management of chronic kidney
disease. Kidney Int. 2024;105(4):S117-S314.
24. Turnbull FM, Abraira C, Anderson RJ, et al.
Intensive glucose control and macrovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia.
2009;52(11):2288-2298.
25. Zoungas S, Arima H, Gerstein HC, et al. Effects
of intensive glucose control on microvascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes: A
meta-analysis of individual participant data
from randomised controlled trials. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(6):431-437.
26. ElSayed NA, Aleppo G, Bannuru RR, et al. 10.
Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management:
Standards of Care in Diabetes-2024. Diabetes
Care. 2024;47(Suppl 1):S179-S218.
27. Bi Y, Li M, Liu Y, et al. Intensive blood-pressure
control in patients with type 2 diabetes. N
Engl J Med. 2024. [Epub ahead of print]. DOI:
10.1056/NEJMoa2412006.
28. Prattichizzo F, Ceriello A. Positioning newer
drugs in the management of type 2 diabetes.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2021;9(3):138-139.
29. McGuire DK, Shih WJ, Cosentino F, et
al. Association of SGLT2 inhibitors with
cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in
patients with type 2 diabetes: A meta-analysis.
JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6(2):148-158.
30. Nuffield Department of Population Health
Renal Studies Group; SGLT2 inhibitor MetaAnalysis Cardio-Renal Trialists’ Consortium.
Impact of diabetes on the effects of sodium
glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors on kidney
outcomes: Collaborative meta-analysis
of large placebo-controlled trials. Lancet.
2022;400(10365):1788-1801.
31. Bae JH, Park EG, Kim S, et al. Effects of sodiumglucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors on renal
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes:
A systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Sci Rep.
2019;9(1):13009.
32. Herrington WG, Staplin N, Wanner C, et al.
Empagliflozin in patients with chronic kidney
disease. N Engl J Med. 2023;388(2):117-127.
33. Staplin N, Roddick AJ, Emberson J, et al. Net
effects of sodium-glucose co-transporter-2
inhibition in different patient groups: A
meta-analysis of large placebo-controlled
randomized trials. EClinicalMedicine.
2021;41:101163.
34. Vaduganathan M, Docherty KF, Claggett BL,
et al. SGLT-2 inhibitors in patients with heart
failure: A comprehensive meta-analysis of
five randomised controlled trials. Lancet.
2022;400(10354):757-767.
35. Badve SV, Bilal A, Lee MMY, et al. Effects
of GLP-1 receptor agonists on kidney and
cardiovascular disease outcomes: A metaanalysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2024. [Epub ahead of
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
CARDIO-RENAL PROTECTION
print]. DOI: 10.1016/s2213-8587(24)00271-7.
36. Rivera FB, Cruz LLA, Magalong JV, et al.
Cardiovascular and renal outcomes of
glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists
among patients with and without type
2 diabetes mellitus: A meta-analysis of
randomized placebo-controlled trials. Am J Prev
Cardiol. 2024;18:100679.
37. Perkovic V, Tuttle KR, Rossing P , et al. Effects
of semaglutide on chronic kidney disease in
patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2024;391(2):109-121.
38. Kosiborod MN, Petrie MC, Borlaug BA, et al.
Semaglutide in patients with obesity-related
heart failure and type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2024;390(15):1394-1407.
39. Marso SP , Bain SC, Consoli A, et al.
Semaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes
in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2016;375(19):1834-1844.
40. A research study to look at how semaglutide
compared to placebo affects diabetic eye
disease in people with type 2 diabetes
(FOCUS). ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT03811561. Available from: https://
clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT03811561[Accessed
September 2024].
41. Ahmad A, Sabbour H. Effectiveness and
safety of the combination of sodium-glucose
transport protein 2 inhibitors and glucagonlike peptide-1 receptor agonists in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of observational
studies. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2024;23(1):99.
42. Mann JFE, Rossing P , Bakris G, et al. Effects of
semaglutide with and without concomitant
SGLT2 inhibitor use in participants with type
2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease in the
FLOW trial. Nat Med. 2024;30(10):2849-2856.
43. Nicholls SJ, Bhatt DL, Buse JB, et al.
Comparison of tirzepatide and dulaglutide
on major adverse cardiovascular events
in participants with type 2 diabetes and
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease:
SURPASS-CVOT design and baseline
characteristics. Am Heart J. 2024;267:1-11.
44. Packer M, Zile MR, Kramer CM, et al.
Tirzepatide for heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction and obesity. N Engl J Med.
2024. [Epub ahead of print]. DOI: 10.1056/
NEJMoa2410027.
45. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Group. Effect of intensive blood-glucose
control with metformin on complications
in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes
(UKPDS 34). Lancet.1998;352(9131):854-865.
46. Adler AI, Coleman RL, Leal J, et al. Post-trial
monitoring of a randomised controlled trial of
intensive glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes
extended from 10 years to 24 years (UKPDS
91). Lancet. 2024;404(10448):145-155.
47. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.
Intensive blood glucose control and vascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2008;358(24):2560-2572.
48. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Neal B, et al. Followup of blood-pressure lowering and glucose
control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2014;371(15):1392-1406.
49. Rosenstock J, Kahn SE, Johansen OE, et
al. Effect of linagliptin vs glimepiride on
major adverse cardiovascular outcomes
in patients with type 2 diabetes: The
CAROLINA randomized clinical trial. JAMA.
2019;322(12):1155-1166.
50. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Group. Intensive blood-glucose control
with sulphonylureas or insulin compared
with conventional treatment and risk of
complications in patients with type 2 diabetes
(UKPDS 33). Lancet. 1998;352(9131):837-853.
51. Holman RR, Coleman RL, Chan JCN, et al.
Effects of acarbose on cardiovascular and
diabetes outcomes in patients with coronary
heart disease and impaired glucose tolerance
(ACE): A randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2017;5(11):877-886.
52. Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, et al.
Rosiglitazone evaluated for cardiovascular
outcomes in oral agent combination therapy
for type 2 diabetes (RECORD): A multicentre,
randomised, open-label trial. Lancet.
2009;373(9681):2125-2135.
53. Dormandy JA, Charbonnel B, Eckland DJ, et
al. Secondary prevention of macrovascular
events in patients with type 2 diabetes in the
PROactive study (PROspective pioglitAzone
Clinical Trial In macroVascular Events):
A randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2005;366(9493):1279-1289.
54. Scirica BM, Bhatt DL, Braunwald E, et al.
Saxagliptin and cardiovascular outcomes in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J
Med. 2013;369(14):1317-1326.
55. White WB, Cannon CP , Heller SR, et al.
Alogliptin after acute coronary syndrome in
Chapter 6
patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2013;369(14):1327-1335.
56. Green JB, Bethel MA, Armstrong PW, et
al. Effect of sitagliptin on cardiovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2015;373(3):232-242.
57. Rosenstock J, Perkovic V, Johansen OE, et
al. Effect of linagliptin vs placebo on major
cardiovascular events in adults with type 2
diabetes and high cardiovascular and renal
risk: The CARMELINA randomized clinical trial.
JAMA. 2019;321(1):69-79.
58. Scirica BM, Braunwald E, Raz I, et al.
Heart failure, saxagliptin, and diabetes
mellitus: Observations from the SAVORTIMI 53 randomized trial. Circulation.
2014;130(18):1579-1588.
59. Gerstein HC, Bosch J, Dagenais GR, et al.
Basal insulin and cardiovascular and other
outcomes in dysglycemia. N Engl J Med.
2012;367(4):319-328.
60. Pratley RE, Husain M, Lingvay I, et al. Heart
failure with insulin degludec versus glargine
U100 in patients with type 2 diabetes at high
risk of cardiovascular disease: DEVOTE 14.
Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2019;18(1):156.
61. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Anker SD, et al. Effect
of finerenone on chronic kidney disease
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2020;383(23):2219-2229.
62. Pitt B, Filippatos G, Agarwal R, et al.
Cardiovascular events with finerenone in
kidney disease and type 2 diabetes. N Engl J
Med. 2021;385(24):2252-2263.
63. Agarwal R, Filippatos G, Pitt B, et al.
Cardiovascular and kidney outcomes with
finerenone in patients with type 2 diabetes
and chronic kidney disease: The FIDELITY
pooled analysis. Eur Heart J. 2022;43(6):474484.
64. Rossing P , Filippatos G, Agarwal R, et al.
Finerenone in predominantly advanced CKD
and type 2 diabetes with or without sodiumglucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor therapy.
Kidney Int Rep. 2022;7(1):36-45.
65. Rossing P , Anker SD, Filippatos G, et al.
Finerenone in patients with chronic kidney
disease and type 2 diabetes by sodiumglucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor treatment:
The FIDELITY analysis. Diabetes Care.
2022;45(12):2991-2998.
66. Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, Vaduganathan M,
et al. Finerenone in heart failure with mildly
reduced or preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J
Med. 2024;391(16):1475-1485.
67. Naaman SC, Bakris GL. Diabetic nephropathy:
Update on pillars of therapy slowing
progression. Diabetes Care. 2023;46(9):15741586.
68. Blazek O, Bakris GL. The evolution of “pillars of
therapy” to reduce heart failure risk and slow
diabetic kidney disease progression. Am Heart
J Plus. 2022;19:100187.
69. Bae J, Liu D, Chinthammit C, et al. Type
2 diabetes pharmacotherapy trends in
high-risk subgroups. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2022;24(6):1166-1171.
Management of Metabolic
Dysfunction-Associated
Steatotic Liver Disease
(MASLD) in Type 2 Diabetes
Chapter 7
MANAGEMENT OF MASLD
Chapter 7
RECOMMENDATIONS
Optimal Care Basic Care
Screening and risk
assessment
• Suspect MASLD in all people with
T2DM, especially if overweight or
obese; LFTs are abnormal
• Screen for MASLD-related fibrosis
- FIB-4 score
- Imaging if FIB-4 result elevated
- VCTE
- MRE
• Suspect MASLD in all people with
T2DM, especially if overweight or
obese; LFTs are abnormal
• Screen for MASLD-related fibrosis
- FIB-4 score
- Imaging if FIB-4 result elevated
(if available)
Management of
people with T2DM
and at-risk MASLD
• Implement Pillars of Diabetes Care
(Chapter 6)
• At-risk MASLD determined by FIB-4
and imaging
• Promote healthy lifestyle change
and at least 5% weight loss if
overweight or obese
• Specific MASLD therapy
- Resmetirom (where approved)
- GLP-1RAs (including semaglutide,
liraglutide, and tirzepatide)
• Consider metabolic bariatric surgery
• Implement Pillars of Diabetes Care
(Chapter 6)
• At-risk MASLD determined by FIB-4
alone or with imaging if available
• Promote healthy lifestyle change
and at least 5% weight loss if
overweight or obese
• Specific MASLD therapy
- Pioglitazone (if available and not
contraindicated)
- SGLT2i for weight loss and cardiorenal protection
Note: These recommendations also apply to people with intermediate hyperglycaemia.
FIB-4, fibrosis-4 index; GLP-1RA, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; LFT, liver function test(s); MASLD, metabolic
dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease; MRE, magnetic resonance elastography; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2
inhibitor; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; VCTE, vibration-controlled transient elastography.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
MANAGEMENT OF MASLD
o Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), previously termed
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), is steatotic liver disease without harmful alcohol
intake.
o MASLD is the most common chronic liver disease and is closely linked with type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM), intermediate hyperglycaemia, and obesity.
o MASLD increases risk of adverse liver and cardio-renal outcomes.
o All people with T2DM are at-risk of MASLD. The main objective is to identify and manage
those with “at-risk MASLD” to prevent progression to cirrhosis and its complications.
o Identifying and managing MASLD in resource-poor settings is challenging due to the
limited availability of required blood and imaging tests, access to preferred glucoselowering medications, and the scarcity of specialised services.
o The global prevalence of MASLD in people with T2DM is 65% and metabolic dysfunctionassociated steatohepatitis (MASH) is 32%. Thirty-six per cent of people have fibrosis and
15% advanced fibrosis. MASLD is common in obesity.
o Individuals with T2DM and suspected MASLD should be assessed for risk of developing
advanced liver disease with a blood-based risk score (Fibrosis-4 index [FIB-4]) and followed
up with vibration-controlled transient elastography (VCTE) or magnetic resonance
elastography (MRE) imaging to detect fibrosis, if available.
o Liver biopsy is not required for managing most people with MASLD.
o MASLD-specific interventions include lifestyle modification and weight loss (≥5%–10%).
o Resmetirom is the only approved (in the USA) MASH-targeted therapy. It is an oral, liverdirected, thyroid hormone beta-1 receptor agonist and is indicated for non-cirrhotic MASH
and moderate-to-advanced liver fibrosis.
o No blood glucose-lowering (BGL) medication for T2DM has an indication as a MASLDtargeted therapy.
o Some glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists (semaglutide, liraglutide,
tirzepatide) and pioglitazone improve histological features of MASH. Semaglutide has
recently been demonstrated to improve liver fibrosis.
o Pioglitazone is not available in many countries and its side effect profile should be
considered in deciding whether or not to prescribe it.
o Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors improve liver steatosis without
affecting liver fibrosis linked to weight loss.
o Insulin is the preferred treatment of hyperglycaemia in T2DM with decompensated cirrhosis.
o Statin therapy is safe in T2DM and MASLD, including compensated cirrhosis.
o Metabolic bariatric surgery is an option to treat MASLD/MASH in those with severe obesity
and has been associated with resolution of MASLD and MASH but not advanced fibrosis.
KEY POINTS
Chapter 7
BACKGROUND
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic
liver disease (MASLD), previously termed nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), is defined
as steatotic liver disease (SLD) in the presence
of one or more cardiometabolic risk factors
(including type 2 diabetes mellitus [T2DM] and
intermediate hyperglycaemia) and the absence
of harmful alcohol intake. The change in
nomenclature from “non-alcoholic” to “metabolic
dysfunction” reflects an evolving understanding
of these conditions and their metabolic links.1
MASLD is the most common chronic liver
disease and is closely linked with T2DM,
intermediate hyperglycaemia, and obesity. In
addition to adverse liver outcomes, MASLD is
associated with an increased risk of adverse
cardio-renal outcomes.
Other forms of SLD include alcohol-related
liver disease (ALD) (alcohol intake >50 g/day for
females and >60 g/day for males) and MASLD
with moderate increased alcohol intake (MetALD)
(alcohol intake 20–50 g/day for females and
30–60 g/day for males).1
have a high index of suspicion for MASLD in all
people with T2DM and to specifically identify and
intervene in those with “at-risk MASLD” to prevent
progression to cirrhosis and its complications.
GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
MASLD is an important, common, and
increasingly recognised serious comorbidity
in people with T2DM and intermediate
hyperglycaemia. Identifying and managing
MASLD in resource-poor settings present
several challenges. The blood and imaging tests
required for screening for at-risk individuals with
MASLD may not be available. Preferred glucoselowering medications for managing people with
MASLD may not be available, accessible, and
affordable. The only MASLD-targeted treatment
is only currently approved in the United States.
Specialised services are scarce. Despite these
limitations, much can still be done through
primary care and diabetes services in resourcelimited settings to improve the management and
outcomes for people with T2DM and MASLD.
EVIDENCE SUMMARY
The prevalence of MASLD, MASH, and
fibrosis in T2DM
An estimated 30% of the global general
population has MASLD with regional differences
ranging from 25% in Western Europe to 44% in
Latin America.2
The global prevalence of MASLD in people with
T2DM is 56%, two-fold higher than in the general
population, with studies from Europe reporting
the highest prevalence at 68%. The reported
prevalence of MASH is 37%, and 17% who had a
liver biopsy had advanced fibrosis. Individuals
with T2DM not only have a greater prevalence of
MASLD but also an increased risk of developing
MASH and advanced fibrosis compared with the
general population.2
A more recent analysis of nearly two million
individuals with T2DM reported prevalence rates
of MASLD of 65% and MASH of 32%, with 36%
of those with MASLD having fibrosis (stage F2–
F4) and 15% advanced fibrosis (stage F3–F4).3
However, it should be noted that many of the
included studies were from clinics and hospital
settings and were not random samples.
The spectrum of MASLD includes:
o Metabolic dysfunction-associated
steatotic (fatty) liver (MASL)
o Metabolic dysfunction-associated
steatohepatitis (MASH)
o Fibrosis
o Cirrhosis
o MASH-related hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC)
The intricate association between MASLD/MASH
in individuals with T2DM and intermediate
hyperglycaemia and adverse liver and
systematic impacts emphasises the need for
proactive intervention and tailored personalised
management strategies.
A definitive diagnosis of hepatic steatosis
requires either imaging or histology and is not
practical or necessary in a routine clinical setting.
Adverse outcomes of MASLD relate to MASH
and fibrosis. Consequently, the objective is to
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
MANAGEMENT OF MASLD
In a study involving 360 people with T2DM
who underwent liver biopsies when alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels were persistently
>20 IU/L in females or >30 IU/L in males in the
absence of other liver disease, the prevalence of
MASH, advanced fibrosis, and cirrhosis was 58%,
38%, and 10%, respectively.4
Of note and relevance to diabetes, in overweight
populations the prevalence of MASLD was
70%, MASL 42%, MASH 34%, fibrosis stages
2–4 20%, and 7% had advanced fibrosis stages
3–4. Prevalences were similar in the obese
population.5 Fibrosis progression is subject to a
myriad of influences, including comorbidities,
genetic factors, and environmental conditions.
The increased risk of major adverse
liver outcomes is linked to the particular
manifestation of MASLD. A Swedish registrybased cohort study of 230,992 people with T2DM
without a history of liver disease reported a low
incidence of adverse outcomes, with 3,215 (1.4%)
developing major adverse liver outcomes over
10 years.6 In a national matched prospective
cohort study of 10,568 individuals with biopsyconfirmed MASLD with a median follow-up of
14.2 years, 4,338 with MASLD died. Compared
with controls, individuals with MASLD had
significantly increased overall mortality (16.9
versus 28.6/1000 person-years). Significant
excess mortality risk was 8.3/1000 person-years
for simple steatosis, 13.4/1000 person-years for
non-fibrotic MASH, 18.4/1000 person-years for
non-cirrhotic fibrosis, and 53.6/1000 personyears for cirrhosis.7
T2DM is associated with poorer outcomes
in individuals with biopsy-proven MASH and
compensated cirrhosis, including an increased
risk of death and HCC. Compared with
metabolically healthy individuals, people with
T2DM had the highest risk of having MASLD
(odds ratio [OR] = 10.88) followed by intermediate
hyperglycaemia (OR = 4.19). During a median
follow-up of 26.7 years, people with MASLD had
significantly higher age-adjusted mortality than
non-MASLD (32.7% versus 28.7%) with the highest
age-standardised cumulative mortality in those
with T2DM (41.3%), followed by intermediate
hyperglycaemia (35.1%), compared with
metabolically healthy individuals (21.9%).8
While the natural history of MASLD is relatively
well-defined, there is substantial individual
variability in disease trajectories. The risk of
future liver-related events starts to increase at
the fibrosis stage. However, it takes decades
for MASLD to progress to cirrhosis and hepatic
decompensation. 1
Screening and diagnosis of MASLD at-risk
of advanced liver disease in people with
T2DM
The association between MASLD stage and
adverse outcomes underlines the need for
nuanced clinical approaches.1 The primary
goal in the management of MASLD in people
with T2DM is to identify individuals at-risk of
MASLD-related fibrosis, particularly those with
abdominal obesity and additional metabolic risk
factors or abnormal liver function tests. This has
become an important aspect of comprehensive
care for T2DM but remains challenging in
resource-limited health systems.
Screening and diagnosis of individuals
with MASLD who are at-risk of developing
advanced liver disease usually involves a twostep approach of an initial blood-based score
followed by imaging.
Blood-based score
The Fibrosis-4 index (FIB-4) is the most widely
used available tool. It uses a combination
of blood test values and anthropometric
information to screen for risk of liver fibrosis.
FIB-4 is calculated as age x aspartate
transaminase (AST)/(platelet count x √ ALT)
(age in years, ALT and AST in U/L, and platelet
count in 109/L).9 A FIB-4 score <1.3 identifies
individuals who are not likely to have advanced
fibrosis and who require ongoing periodic
re-evaluation (one to three years) while a FIB4 value >2.67 is associated with high-risk and
ideally should be referred to a hepatologist.10
The ability of FIB-4 to detect fibrosis is limited
in the intermediate score range (1.30–2.67). A
lower cut-off value of 2.0 is recommended in
people aged over 65 years and the test does
not perform well in individuals younger than
35 years, and also less well in people with
diabetes.11 Automated FIB-4 score calculation
followed by reminder messages in the electronic
health system has been shown to increase
referral of individuals with increased fibrosis
scores to hepatologists from 3% to 33%.12
Persistently or intermittently elevated ALT
levels >30 U/L may indicate chronic liver injury,
whereas AST levels lack sensitivity and specificity
in identifying MASLD with advanced fibrosis.
Chapter 7
Imaging
Individuals assessed as moderate or high-risk
of advanced disease on FIB-4 should undergo
further assessment with imaging.
Vibration-controlled transient elastography
(VCTE) is commonly used to estimate liver
stiffness measurement (LSM) as an assessment
of degree of fibrosis and controlled attenuation
parameter (CAP) as an assessment of steatosis.13
Other ultrasound-based methods like acoustic
radio force impulse (if available) may be
preferred due to cost considerations. Some
ultrasound techniques may not be reliably used
to examine adults with class 2 obesity.1
Magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) can
also be used to assess liver stiffness and is more
sensitive than VCTE in detecting fibrosis stage ≥2
but requires specialised equipment to generate
mechanical waves and dedicated acquisition
techniques, which are only available at a few
sites.10
Tests of specific collagen-related blood
constituents (e.g., the Enhanced Liver Fibrosis
test, ELF) may be an alternative to imaging to
identify advanced liver fibrosis in the future.1
Liver biopsy is not required for clinical
management in most cases of people with MASLD.
Management
The evolving landscape of MASLD management
in T2DM requires personalised approaches
based on the Key Pillars of Diabetes
Management (See Chapter 6) and considering
MASH-targeted therapy if available, accessible,
and affordable.
MASLD-specific interventions
Lifestyle modification and weight loss
Overweight and obese MASLD people with
T2DM and intermediate hyperglycaemia
should be recommended dietary and physical
activity lifestyle changes that promote weight
loss to reduce liver steatosis and improve
cardiometabolic profile, while discouraging
alcohol consumption.1
The degree of weight loss has a significant
impact on different MASLD manifestations.
Sustained diet-induced weight loss of ≥5%
reduces liver fat, 7%–10% weight loss improves
liver inflammation, and ≥10% weight loss
improves fibrosis.1, 14 For example, weight loss
of at least 7% by lifestyle modification with a
Mediterranean diet was associated with MASH
resolution after 52 weeks, and weight loss
of more than 10% with improvement in liver
fibrosis. However, histological changes with
lifestyle intervention are achieved in less than
20% of people.15
Pharmacotherapy
1. MASH-targeted therapy – resmetirom
Resmetirom is the first specific medication
for the treatment of MASLD and received
accelerated FDA approval in March 2024. It is
an orally active, liver-directed, thyroid hormone
beta-1 receptor agonist and is indicated for
adults with non-cirrhotic MASH and moderateto-advanced liver fibrosis in conjunction with
diet and exercise. In a phase 3 randomised
controlled trial (RCT), resmetirom 80 mg resulted
in resolution of MASH without worsening
of fibrosis in 25.9% of individuals compared
with 9.7% in the placebo group, and fibrosis
improvement by at least one stage with no
worsening of MASLD activity score in 24.2%
compared with 14.2% in the placebo group.
Low-density lipoprotein concentrations were also
significantly decreased.16
The usual daily dose is 80 mg in individuals
with a body weight <100 kg and 100 mg with
body weight ≥100 kg. Dose reduction should be
considered with moderate CYP2C8 inhibitors
such as clopidogrel. Resmetirom is generally
well-tolerated with the most common side
effects being gastrointestinal (diarrhoea, nausea,
and vomiting) and pruritus.1, 14 However, it is not
widely available.
There is currently no effective MASH-targeted
pharmacotherapy available for people with
MASH and cirrhosis.
2. Blood glucose-lowering medications
Blood glucose-lowering (BGL) medications for
T2DM have been reviewed in Chapters 3 and 4.
BGL medications may impact MASLD directly
or through improved glycaemic control and/or
weight loss. No currently available BGL or weight
management medication is approved as a
MASLD-targeted therapy. The following is a brief
review of the specific effects of BGL medications
on MASLD.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
MANAGEMENT OF MASLD
Metformin
Metformin has not been shown to improve
steatohepatitis in paired-biopsy studies. However,
it is safe and should be continued in individuals
with cirrhosis unless discontinuation is required
due to hepatic decompensation or renal failure.
Sulfonylureas
There are no RCTs with liver histological
endpoints which have examined the effects of
sulfonylureas as a MASLD-targeted therapy.
There is an increased risk of hypoglycaemia in
cirrhotic liver disease.
Insulin
Insulin reduces hepatic steatosis but its effect
on steatohepatitis remains unknown.17 Insulin
treatment for uncontrolled T2DM in the
presence of MASLD can decrease liver steatosis
by addressing lipotoxicity and glucotoxicity.
However, it may potentially increase hepatic
triacylglycerol content and contribute to hepatic
fat accumulation.18 Insulin is the preferred
treatment of hyperglycaemia in adults with
T2DM with decompensated cirrhosis.
Thiazolidinediones (pioglitazone)
Pioglitazone has been demonstrated in several
phase 2 RCTs to improve histological features
of MASH but has no clear effect on fibrosis
regression.19-21 However, there has not been a
large phase 3 multicentre trial with pioglitazone
which has further assessed these findings.
Pioglitazone is not available in many countries
and its side effect profile should be considered in
deciding whether or not to prescribe it.
SGLT2 inhibitors
Short-term SGLT2 inhibitor RCTs have shown
reversal of liver steatosis and a reduction
in plasma aminotransferase levels but no
improvement in markers of liver fibrosis.22, 23
These changes seem to be primarily linked to
weight loss rather than specific targeted MASLD
effects. SGLT2 inhibitors are safe in people
with T2DM and MASLD and have other welldocumented cardio-renal benefits.
GLP-1 receptor agonists
Single GLP-1 receptor agonists (liraglutide and
semaglutide),18 dual GLP-1 receptor agonists
(tirzepatide24, 25 and survodutide 26), and triple
GLP-1 receptor agonists (retatrutide) 27 have
shown positive effects not only on weight loss
and hyperglycaemia but also on the reduction
of liver steatosis, with some showing benefits
on histological parameters in people with
biopsy-proven non-cirrhotic MASH. 25, 27
Recently, the positive results of the ESSENCE
study were released. The ESSENCE study
is a phase 3 RCT evaluating the effect of
subcutaneous semaglutide 2.4 mg in people
with biopsy-proven MASH and fibrosis stage
2 or 3, which included 56% of participants
with T2DM.28 After 72 weeks in the first 800
individuals (56% T2DM), endpoints were
significantly better with semaglutide compared
with placebo. Primary endpoints showed 62.9%
of people treated with semaglutide 2.4 mg
achieved resolution of steatohepatitis with
no worsening of liver fibrosis compared to
34.1% taking placebo, and 37.0% treated with
semaglutide achieved improvements in liver
fibrosis with no worsening of steatohepatitis
compared to 22.5% taking placebo. Secondary
endpoints showed 32.8% of participants treated
with semaglutide achieved both resolution
of steatohepatitis and improvements in liver
fibrosis (compared to 16.2% taking placebo).29
This is the first phase 3 GLP-1 receptor agonistrelated study to show significant definitive
improvement in liver fibrosis in MASLD.
GLP-1 receptor agonists have not been shown
to be beneficial in cirrhosis, with a placebocontrolled RCT in adults with biopsy-confirmed
MASH-related compensated cirrhosis and
body mass index ≥27 kg/m² failing to show an
improvement with semaglutide 2.4 mg weekly in
fibrosis or achievement of MASH resolution, but
there were no safety concerns.30
Cohort studies have reported that GLP-1
receptor agonist use in people with T2DM
are associated with lower risk of progression
to cirrhosis and lower mortality compared
with using DPP4 inhibitors but the protective
association was not seen in people with existing
cirrhosis.31 Another cohort study which matched
people with T2DM with and without cirrhosis
reported that GLP-1 receptor agonist use was
associated with lower risk of death and major
liver outcomes.32
Overall, given the established cardio-renal
benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor
agonists and the weight reduction effects,
especially of GLP-1 receptor agonists, these
agents are preferred in people with T2DM and
MASLD, if available, accessible, and affordable,
and taking into account each individual’s
characteristics and comorbidities.
Chapter 7
3. Statins
Statin therapy is safe in adults with T2DM and
MASLD, including in those with compensated
cirrhosis. Statins should be initiated or continued
for cardiovascular risk reduction as clinically
indicated. Recent data have reported that
regular use of statins was associated with a 15%
lower hazard ratio of new-onset liver disease
and a 28% lower hazard ratio for liver-related
deaths (cirrhosis and HCC) compared with no
statin use.33 Data on statin safety and efficacy
in individuals with decompensated cirrhosis are
limited and therefore statin therapy should be
used with caution and closely monitored.
4. Metabolic bariatric surgery
Metabolic bariatric surgery (MBS) is an option
to treat MASLD/MASH in those with severe
obesity given the positive effect on T2DM and
cardiovascular disease and has been associated
with resolution of MASLD and MASH.34, 35
However, advanced fibrosis can persist for many
years and is associated with lesser weight loss
and metabolic improvement.36 In adults with
T2DM and compensated cirrhosis from MASLD,
MBS should be used with caution and is currently
not recommended in decompensated cirrhosis.
REFERENCES
1. European Association for the Study of the
Liver, European Association for the Study of
Diabetes, European Association for the Study
of Obesity. EASL-EASD-EASO Clinical Practice
Guidelines on the management of metabolic
dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
(MASLD). J Hepatol. 2024;81(3):492-542.
2. Younossi ZM, Golabi P , Paik JM, et al. The
global epidemiology of nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease (NAFLD) and nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH): a systematic review.
Hepatology. 2023;77(4):1335-1347.
3. En Li Cho E, Ang CZ, Quek J, et al. Global
prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
in type 2 diabetes mellitus: an updated
systematic review and meta-analysis. Gut.
2023;72(11):2138-2148.
4. Castera L, Laouenan C, Vallet-Pichard A, et
al. High prevalence of NASH and advanced
fibrosis in type 2 diabetes: A prospective study
of 330 outpatients undergoing liver biopsies
for elevated ALT, using a low threshold.
Diabetes Care. 2023;46(7):1354-1362.
5. Quek J, Chan KE, Wong ZY, et al. Global
prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
in the overweight and obese population: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2023;8(1):20-30.
6. Shang Y, Grip ET, Modica A, et al. Metabolic
syndrome traits increase the risk of major
adverse liver outcomes in type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2024;47(6):978-985.
7. Simon TG, Roelstraete B, Khalili H, et al.
Mortality in biopsy-confirmed nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease: results from a nationwide
cohort. Gut. 2021;70(7):1375-1382.
8. Golabi P , Paik JM, Kumar A, et al. Nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and associated
mortality in individuals with type 2 diabetes,
pre-diabetes, metabolically unhealthy, and
metabolically healthy individuals in the United
States. Metabolism. 2023;146:155642.
9. Vallet-Pichard A, Mallet V, Nalpas B, et al.
FIB-4: An inexpensive and accurate marker
of fibrosis in HCV infection. comparison
with liver biopsy and fibrotest. Hepatology.
2007;46(1):32-36.
10. Rinella ME, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Siddiqui
MS, et al. AASLD Practice Guidance on the
clinical assessment and management of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology.
2023;77(5):1797-1835.
11. European Association for the Study of the
L. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines on noninvasive tests for evaluation of liver disease
severity and prognosis - 2021 update. J
Hepatol. 2021;75(3):659-689.
12. Zhang X, Yip TC, Wong GL, et al. Clinical care
pathway to detect advanced liver disease
in patients with type 2 diabetes through
automated fibrosis score calculation and
electronic reminder messages: A randomised
controlled trial. Gut. 2023;72(12):2364-2371.
13. Mikolasevic I, Orlic L, Franjic N, et al. Transient
elastography (FibroScan(®)) with controlled
attenuation parameter in the assessment of
liver steatosis and fibrosis in patients with
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease - Where do we
stand? World J Gastroenterol. 2016;22(32):72367251.
14. Koutoukidis DA, Koshiaris C, Henry JA, et al.
The effect of the magnitude of weight loss on
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Metabolism.
2021;115:154455.
IDF Global Clinical Practice Recommendations for Managing Type 2 Diabetes – 2025
MANAGEMENT OF MASLD
15. Vilar-Gomez E, Martinez-Perez Y, CalzadillaBertot L, et al. Weight loss through lifestyle
modification significantly reduces features of
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology.
2015;149(2):367-378 e365; quiz e314-365.
16. Harrison SA, Bedossa P , Guy CD, et al. A phase
3, randomized, controlled trial of resmetirom
in NASH with liver fibrosis. N Engl J Med.
2024;390(6):497-509.
17. Budd J, Cusi K. Role of agents for the
treatment of diabetes in the management of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Curr Diab Rep.
2020;20(11):59.
18. Gastaldelli A, Stefan N, Haring HU. Livertargeting drugs and their effect on blood
glucose and hepatic lipids. Diabetologia.
2021;64(7):1461-1479.
19. Cusi K, Orsak B, Bril F, et al. Long-term
pioglitazone treatment for patients with
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and prediabetes
or type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized trial.
Ann Intern Med. 2016;165(5):305-315.
20. Aithal GP , Thomas JA, Kaye PV, et al.
Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of
pioglitazone in nondiabetic subjects with
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology.
2008;135(4):1176-1184.
21. Sanyal AJ, Chalasani N, Kowdley KV, et al.
Pioglitazone, vitamin E, or placebo for
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med.
2010;362(18):1675-1685.
22. Abdelgani S, Khattab A, Adams J, et al.
Empagliflozin reduces liver fat in individuals
with and without diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2024;47(4):668-675.
23. Kahl S, Gancheva S, Strassburger K, et al.
Empagliflozin effectively lowers liver fat
content in well-controlled type 2 diabetes: A
randomized, double-blind, phase 4, placebocontrolled trial. Diabetes Care. 2020;43(2):298305.
24. Gastaldelli A, Cusi K, Fernandez Lando L, et al.
Effect of tirzepatide versus insulin degludec on
liver fat content and abdominal adipose tissue
in people with type 2 diabetes (SURPASS-3
MRI): A substudy of the randomised, openlabel, parallel-group, phase 3 SURPASS-3 trial.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2022;10(6):393-406.
25. Loomba R, Hartman ML, Lawitz EJ, et al.
Tirzepatide for metabolic dysfunctionassociated steatohepatitis with liver fibrosis.
N Engl J Med. 2024;391(4):299-310.
26. Sanyal AJ, Bedossa P , Fraessdorf M, et al.
A phase 2 randomized trial of survodutide
in MASH and fibrosis. N Engl J Med.
2024;391(4):311-319.
27. Sanyal AJ, Kaplan LM, Frias JP , et al. Triple
hormone receptor agonist retatrutide for
metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic
liver disease: A randomized phase 2a trial. Nat
Med. 2024;30(7):2037-2048.
28. Newsome PN, Sanyal AJ, Engebretsen KA,
et al. Semaglutide 2.4 mg in participants
with metabolic dysfunction-associated
steatohepatitis: Baseline characteristics and
design of the phase 3 ESSENCE trial. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther. 2024;60(11-12):1525-1533.
29. Newsome PN, Sanyal AJ, Kliers I. Phase 3
ESSENCE trial: Semaglutide in metabolic
dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis.
Gastroenterol Hepatol (N Y). 2024;20(12 Suppl
11):6-7.
30. Loomba R, Abdelmalek MF, Armstrong MJ,
et al. Semaglutide 2.4 mg once weekly in
patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitisrelated cirrhosis: A randomised, placebocontrolled phase 2 trial. Lancet Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2023;8(6):511-522.
31. Kanwal F, Kramer JR, Li L, et al. GLP-1 receptor
agonists and risk for cirrhosis and related
complications in patients with metabolic
dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease.
JAMA Intern Med. 2024;184(11):1314-1323.
32. Yen FS, Hou MC, Cheng-Chung Wei J, et al.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist
use in patients with liver cirrhosis and
type 2 diabetes. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2024;22(6):1255-1264 e1218.
33. Vell MS, Loomba R, Krishnan A, et al.
Association of statin use with risk of liver
disease, hepatocellular carcinoma, and
liver-related mortality. JAMA Netw Open.
2023;6(6):e2320222.
34. Verrastro O, Panunzi S, Castagneto-Gissey
L, et al. Bariatric-metabolic surgery versus
lifestyle intervention plus best medical care
in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (BRAVES): A
multicentre, open-label, randomised trial.
Lancet. 2023;401(10390):1786-1797.
35. Lee Y, Doumouras AG, Yu J, et al. Complete
resolution of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
after bariatric surgery: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2019;17(6):1040-1060 e1011.
36. Pais R, Aron-Wisnewsky J, Bedossa P , et al.
Persistence of severe liver fibrosis despite
substantial weight loss with bariatric surgery.
Hepatology. 2022;76(2):456-468.
Chapter 7

International Diabetes Federation
Avenue Herrmann-Debroux 54
B-1160 Brussels, Belgium
info@idf.org idf.org