C
M
Y
CM
MY
CY
CMY
K
210112_MEMS_T2DM CPG_6th-COVER_OL.pdf 1 12/01/2021 1:14 PM
Ministry of Health
Malaysia
Academy of Medicine
Malaysia
Malaysia Endocrine
& Metabolic Society
Family Medicine Specialists
Association of Malaysia
Diabetes Malaysia
MANAGEMENT OF
TYPE 2
DIABETES MELLITUS
(6th Edition)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
DECEMBER 2020 MOH/P/PAK/447.20(GU)-e
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2
DIABETES MELLITUS
(6TH EDITION)
STATEMENT OF INTENT
This guideline is meant for the clinical management of T2DM, based on the best
available evidence at the time of development. Adherence to this guideline may
not necessarily guarantee the best outcome in every case. Every healthcare
provider is responsible for the individualised management of his/her patient
based on patient presentation and management options available locally.
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
These guidelines issued in December 2020, will be reviewed in 5 years (2025)
or sooner if new evidence becomes available.
CPG Secretariat
Health Technology Assessment Section
Medical Development Division
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Level 4, Block E1, Precinct 1
62590 Putrajaya
Electronic version is available on the following websites:
http://www.acadmed.org.my
http://www.diabetes.org.my
http://www.endocrine.my
http://www.mems.org.my
http://www.moh.gov.my
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
This is the revised and updated Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) on Management of Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM). The recommendations in this 6 th edition CPG supersedes the 5 th edition
Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 2015.
MOH/P/PAK/447.20(GU)-e
FOREWORD
by Tan Sri Dato' Seri Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah,
Director General of Health, Malaysia
Management of any chronic disease requires a concerted effort with the
participation of all stake holders starting with the patients themselves and,
clinical healthcare professionals as well as public health policymakers. This is
even more important in the management of Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
An optimum result can only be achieved with a holistic approach and active
patient participation with the support of appropriate diabetes education
and lifestyle modification. In addition to its negative impact on the quality
of life and health care costs, diabetes also increases the economic burden of
individuals, families and communities and, affects national productivity.
I note that there has been a recent explosion of advances made in the
management of diabetic complications. The use of new technology and findings
from landmark trials have changed clinical pathways and recommendations in
the way T2DM is managed. This has been reflected in the latest Clinical Practice
Guidelines (CPG) for the Management of T2DM (6 th Edition). These guidelines
also focus on preventing and reducing diabetes-related complications,
thereby improving clinical outcomes. This CPG will form a valuable resource
for healthcare professionals from primary to tertiary care levels, to deliver the
best possible care for their patients, from disease prevention to treatment of
complications.
In this networked age, we should no longer be working in silos and I would
like to reaffirm the importance and recognition of a multidisciplinary approach
in managing T2DM. I have been a champion for embracing technology and
innovation – and note that there is emphasis on the potential to use mobile
apps and other forms of technological advances / telemedicine to improve
diabetes self-management. The importance of this is even greater now in the
context of the new norm forced on everyone by the Covid-19 pandemic.
The breadth and depth of material covered reflects the commitment and
the dedication of the CPG committee, despite the difficulties encountered
during the Covid-19 pandemic. I would like to congratulate the chairs and the
members for their hard work and it is my sincere wish that this document will
further elevate the standard of diabetes care and reduce the burden of T2DM
in our country.
Tan Sri Dato' Seri Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah
FOREWORD
by Chairpersons of T2DM Clinical Practice Guidelines,
6th edition taskforce
These are exciting times for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
and a time for concern. The past 5 years have seen amazing breakthroughs that
give hope for people with T2DM. Several Cardiovascular Outcome trials (CVOTs)
from 2 new classes of glucose-lowering agents have shown cardiovascular (CV)
protection, beyond glucose.
On the other hand, prevalence of diabetes in Malaysia continues to rise unabated.
The 2019 National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) shows a prevalence
of 18.3% (for adults >18 years of age), a 4% increase from 2015; 48.6% were
undiagnosed. In addition, ~5.0% of our young Malaysians between 18-29 years
are also diabetic. It is worrying to see this trend. The frequent co-existence with
other well-known comorbidities, e.g. hypertension, dyslipidaemia, overweight/
obesity further complicates the situation.
The 5th edition of our Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) for the Management of
T2DM 2015, was detailed and comprehensive. Our aspiration was to build on
the previous CPG. Since then, there have been major advances; in therapeutics,
nutrition, technology as well as, digital health.
The landmark CVOTs have consistently demonstrated positive beneficial CV
outcomes in those with either established or at high risk for cardiovascular
disease (CVD). Another exciting advance has been the discovery of a 2 nd
therapeutic class of agent, apart from the renin-angiotensin system blockers,
to directly reduce progression of diabetic kidney disease (DKD). DKD remains
the largest contributor of new patients requiring dialysis in Malaysia and,
recent renal outcome trials definitively show positive outcomes for prevention
of progression to end-stage renal failure and reduction of albuminuria. More
exciting data may be forthcoming with ongoing dedicated trials investigating
effects of these glucose-lowering agents, on heart failure and prevention
of kidney disease not only in people with diabetes but also, in nondiabetic
individuals.
These results have led to paradigm shifts, changing practices as we move
forward. The objective of these guidelines is to reflect the uptake of this
new data in clinical decision making and therefore, provide evidence-based
recommendations to assist healthcare providers in identifying, diagnosing and
managing our patients with T2DM. Some of the other notable updates, include
additional sections on current hot topics; e.g. non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) and periodontal disease. The landmark CVOTs have been consolidated
and summarised in Appendix 8.
T2DM is not a stand-alone disease instead reaching across a spectrum of other
non-communicable diseases. Hence, in this updated guideline, we expanded our
taskforce to include colleagues from other specialities; including nephrology,
neurology, gastroenterology-hepatology, cardiology, ophthalmology, psychiatry
and dental surgery. The committee hopes that this combination of expertise
has enhanced the recommendations in this CPG to further improve clinical
decision making.
The development of these guidelines extended into an extraordinary situation
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Through it, the hardworking committee
members of the taskforce, including our reviewers, persevered with continuous
and timely discussions to reach consensus where required through use of
technology/remote communication, enabling its completion. To this, we extend
our appreciation and gratitude, and commend their unwavering commitment
to deliver the best evidence-based standard of care to our patients with T2DM.
Foreword
by Chairperson of T2DM Clinical Practice Guidelines, 6th edition taskforce
Dr Chan Siew Pheng
Chairperson
Dato’ Paduka Professor Dr Wan
Mohamad Wan Bebakar
Co-chair
Datuk Dr Zanariah Hussein
Co-chair
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Guidelines development
The guidelines development task force consisted of endocrinologists, paediatric
endocrinologists, family medicine specialists, public health physicians, general
physicians and dietitians. Where relevant, experts from different specialties
were also included to review and update certain sub-sections within these
guidelines. These included a nephrologist, neurologist, gastroenterologisthepatologist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, psychiatrist, dental surgeon,
pharmacist and diabetes educator.
The previous edition of the CPG on Management of T2DM 2015 was used as
the basis for the development of this present guideline.
Literature search was carried out at the following electronic databases:
PUBMED, Medline, Cochrane Databases of Systematic Reviews (CDSR) and
Journal full text via OVID search engine. In addition, the reference lists of all
relevant articles retrieved were searched to identify further studies.
Reference was also made to the lastest edition of other guidelines on the
management of T2DM including guidelines developed by the American
Diabetes Association (ADA) Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes, American
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists’, American College of Endocrinology,
International Diabetes Federation (IDF) Global Guideline for Type 2 Diabetes,
the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD), National Institute
For Health and Care Excellence (NICE); Malaysian CPG on Management of
Obesity, Canadian Diabetes Association, The Royal Australian College of
General Practitioners and Diabetes Australia, Malaysian Dietitians’ Association,
Trafford NHS Healthcare Trust and Joint British Diabetes Societies Inpatient
Care Group.
These updated guidelines also include the latest cardiovascular outcome trials
(CVOTs) and findings from systematic reviews and meta-analyses in literature,
all whilst taking into consideration local practices.
Clinical questions were divided into major subgroups and members of
the task force were assigned individual topics within these subgroups. All
literature retrieved were critically appraised, presented and discussed during
group meetings. All statements and recommendations formulated were
agreed by the task force members. Where the evidence was insufficient, the
recommendations were derived by consensus of the task force members.
The articles were graded using the criteria used by the Canadian Task Force
on the Periodic Health Examination, while the grading of recommendation in
this guideline was standardised with the previous edition of the T2DM CPG
(5th edition) i.e. following the American Heart Association system, for easy
comparison. The rationale for the committee to do so is that the format for
both are familiar to our healthcare professionals and facilitates the CPG’s ease
of use.
The draft guidelines as a whole were submitted for external review by experts
in endocrinology (adult and paediatric) and family medicine, whilst relevant
sub-sections by consult with a neurologist, nephrologist, gastroenterologisthepatologist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, diabetes educator, psychiatrist
and dental surgeon. These guidelines were then presented to the Technical
Advisory Committee for Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Health Technology
Assessment and Clinical Practice Guidelines Council, Ministry of Health Malaysia
for review and approval.
Objectives
The aim of these guidelines is to provide evidence-based recommendations to
assist healthcare providers in the identification, diagnosis and management of
patients with T2DM.
Clinical questions
1. What are the most effective methods to diagnose diabetes and pre-diabetes
individuals and, strategies to detect symptomatic and asymptomatic
individuals, including adolescents?
2. What team-based structured diabetes educational interventions and
initiatives have been proven to successfully improve patient selfmanagement?
3. What nutrition interventions have been proven to effectively prevent,
delay the development of T2DM or reverse diabetes in recently diagnosed
T2DM individuals?
4. What are the recommended indications for self-blood glucose monitoring
(SMBG) in T2DM and the role of mobile health in this form of monitoring
strategy?
5. What are the thresholds for BP levels for initiation of anti-hypertensive
medication in individuals with T2DM and what are the BP targets?
TERMS OF REFERENCE
6. How are patients risk stratified for LDL-lowering therapy in T2DM?
7. Has metabolic surgery come-of-age in the management of obese patients
with T2DM and what is its role?
8. How prevalent is NAFLD in individuals with T2DM and what is its clinical
significance?
9. What is the recommended practical approach to treat diabetic emergencies?
10. What does the evidence say about the possibility of delaying progression
of DKD to ESKD?
11. How should the CV benefits documented in the recent landmark CVOTs in
T2DM patients with established CVD or high risk of CVD influence clinical
management?
12. Is diabetes distress/depression a common problem and how does it
influence diabetes management?
13. How does periodontal disease affect management of T2DM and how can it
best be managed?
14. What are the effective and safe management strategies of individuals with
T2DM in the following situations?
a. In acute illness/pre- and post-operation
b. In the elderly with a special focus on cognitive assessment/dementia
and co-morbidities
c. During Ramadan
15. How should complementary and alternative medicine be addressed in the
holistic management of T2DM?
Updated and new contents:
Major changes in these guidelines are:
1. Inclusion of Periodontal disease, Peripheral arterial disease and Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
2. Inclusion of Summary of Updates at the beginning of each chapter which,
highlights the important new advances and issues requiring emphasis.
3. Replacement of the term chronic kidney disease (CKD) to diabetic kidney
disease (DKD).
4. Replacement of the term oral anti-glycaemic drugs (OAD) to oral glucose
lowering drugs (OGLDs) and glucose lowering drugs (GLD).
TERMS OF REFERENCE
TERMS OF REFERENCE
5. Diabetes in pregnancy is not included as it has its dedicated CPG on
Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy launched in 2018. (Available at: http://
www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/Penerbitan/CPG/Endocrine/1a.pdf).
All other changes and updates within the contents of these guidelines can be
found in the Summary of Updates.
Target population
This guideline is applicable to all adolescents and adults at risk of developing
and with T2DM.
Target audience
These guidelines are meant for all healthcare professionals involved in
treating patients with T2DM which include: medical officers, family medicine
specialists, primary care physicians, general practitioners, public health
personnel, general physicians, endocrinologists, cardiologists, nephrologists,
neurologists, geriatricians, obstetricians and gynaecologists, paediatricians,
ophthalmologists, dentists, nurses, assistant medical officers, podiatrists,
pharmacists, dietitians as well as diabetic nurse educators.
This 6 th edition of the Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of
T2DM was solely funded by the Malaysian Endocrine and Metabolic Society.
All authors in the editorial committee have no conflicts of interests to declare.
CLINICAL PRACTICE
GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT
GROUP
Dr Ang Hock Aun
Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist
Dr Feisul Idzwan Mustapha
Public Health Physician
Dr Foo Siew Hui
Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist
Dr Hew Fen Lee
Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dr Jeyakantha
Ratnasingam
Consultant Endocrinologist
Prof Dato’ Paduka Dr Mafauzy
Mohamed
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dato’ Dr Malik Mumtaz
Ahmed Gulam Sarvar
Consultant Endocrinologist & Nuclear
Medicine Specialist
Dr Masni Mohamad
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Nor Shaffinaz Yusoff Azmi
Merican
Consultant Endocrinologist
Professor Dr Norlela Sukor
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Nurain Mohd Noor
Consultant Endocrinologist
Professor Dr Rohana Abdul Ghani
Consultant Endocrinologist
Professor Dr Winnie Chee Siew See
Consultant Dietitian
CHAIRPERSON
Dr Chan Siew Pheng
Honorary Professor
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
CO-CHAIRS
Dato’ Paduka Professor Dr Wan
Mohamad Wan Bebakar
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Datuk Dr Zanariah Hussein
Consultant Endocrinologist
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
(in alphabetical order)
Dr Alexander Tan Tong Boon
Consultant Endocrinologist
Professor Amir Sharifuddin
Md Khir
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Azraai Bahari Nasruddin
Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dr Barakatun Nisak
Mohd Yusof
Consultant Dietitian
Professor Chan Wah Kheong
Consultant Gastroenterologist and
Hepatologist
Dr Fatimah Zaherah Mohamed
Shah
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Florence Tan Hui Sieng
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Fung Yin Khet
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr G.R. Letchuman Ramanathan
Senior Consultant Physician
Professor Dr Goh Khean Jin
Consultant Neurologist
Dr Ijaz Hallaj Rahmatullah
Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist
Dr Jeshen Lau
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Khaw Chong Hui
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Lee Ching Li
Consultant Dietitian
Assoc Prof Dr Lim Lee Ling
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Lim Shueh Lin
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Lim Siang Chin
Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dr Lim Soo Kun
Consultant Nephrologist
Dr Luqman Bin Ibrahim
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Mastura Ismail
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Dato’ Dr Nor Azizah Aziz
Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist
Professor Dr Nor Azmi Kamaruddin
Senior Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dr Norasyikin A Wahab
@ A Rahman
Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist
Dr Noor Lita Adam
Consultant Endocrinologist
Professor Dr Norlaila Mustafa
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Shanty Velaiutham
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Sharmila Sunita A/P
Paramasivam
Consultant Endocrinologist
Professor Dr Shireene Vethakkan
Consultant Endocrinologist
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
(in alphabetical order)
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
Dr Siti Harnida Md Isa
Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist
Dr Sri Wahyu Taher
Consultant Family Medicine Specialist
Dr Subashini Rajoo
Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dr Tengku Ain Fathlun
Tengku Kamalden
Consultant Ophthalmology
Dr Tong Chin Voon
Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dr V. Rathna Devi a/p
A. Vaithilingam
Consultant Periodontist
Dr Vijay Ananda Paramasvaran
Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dr Wan Mohd Izani
Wan Mohamed
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Wong Ming
Consultant Endocrinologist
Assoc Prof Dr Yeow Toh Peng
Consultant Endocrinologist
Dr Yong Sy Liang
Consultant Endocrinologist
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES DEVELOPMENT GROUP
CLINICAL PRACTICE
GUIDELINES REVIEWERS
The following experts were invited to provide feedback on these guidelines
and are listed in alphabetical order.
Professor Dato’ Dr Anuar Zaini
Md Zaini Md Zain
Professor of Internal Medicine
Dr Chan Yoong Kian
Senior Consultant in Periodontal Dentistry
Datin Professor Dr Chia Yook Chin
Primary Medicine Specialist
Dato’ Dr Faridah Ismail
Consultant Physician & Endocrinologist
Dr Jeyamalar a/p Rajadurai
Consultant Cardiologist
Professor Emeritus Dato’ Dr Khalid
Abd Kadir
Professor of Medicine
Associate Professor Dr Lai Siew Mei
Pauline
Doctor in Pharmacy
Dato’ Dr Ong Loke Meng
Senior Consultant Nephrologist
Dr Nor Fariza Ngah
Senior Consultant Ophthalmologist
Professor Dato’ Dr Raymond
Azman Ali
Senior Consultant Neurologist and
Physician
Dr Salina Abd Aziz
Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
Dr Tan Ming Yeong
Credentialed Diabetes Educator and
Senior Lecturer
Dr Tan Seok Siam
Consultant Gastroenterologisthepatologist
Professor Wu Loo Ling
Consultant Paediatrician and Paediatric
Endocrinologist
STATEMENT OF INTENT 2
REVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES 2
FOREWORD 3
BY TAN SRI DATO' SERI DR NOOR HISHAM ABDULLAH,
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF HEAL TH
FOREWORD 4
BY CHAIRPERSONS OF T2DM CLINICAL PRACTICE
GUIDELINES, 6TH EDITION TASKFORCE
TERMS OF REFERENCE 6
Guidelines development 6
Objectives 7
Clinical questions 7
Updated and new contents: 8
Target population 9
Target audience 9
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
DEVELOPMENT GROUP 10
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
REVIEWERS 13
TABLE OF CONTENTS 14
INTRODUCTION: TYPE 2 DIABETES
MELLITUS, THE DISEASE 17
1.1 Background 17
1.2 Prevalence and state of T2DM
in Malaysia 18
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS 22
2.1 Objective and strategies 22
2.2 Who should be screened 22
2.3 Screening test 24
2.4 Diagnostic tests 24
2.5 Cardiovascular risk estimation 30
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES
MELLITUS 31
3.1 Initial assessment 31
3.2 Diabetes education 35
3.3 Team approach 38
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
3.4 Targets for control 42
3.5 Lifestyle modification 44
3.6 Medications 54
3.7 Treatment algorithms for the
management of T2DM 78
3.8 Monitoring 82
3.9 Management of co-morbidities in T2DM 95
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC
EMERGENCIES 116
4.1 Hypoglycaemia 116
4.2 Diabetic ketoacidosis 122
4.3 Euglycaemic ketoacidosis 128
4.4 Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar
state (HHS) 129
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC
COMPLICATIONS 134
5.1 Retinopathy 134
5.2 Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) 139
5.3 Neuropathy 146
5.4 Cardiovascular disease 155
5.5 Diabetic foot 165
5.6 Sexual dysfunction 167
5.7 Mental health issues in T2DM 172
5.8 Periodontal disease in T2DM 174
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS 177
6.1 Management of T2DM in acute illness,
stress and surgery 178
6.2 T2DM in adolescents 181
6.3 T2DM in elderly 186
6.4 Diabetes in Ramadan 189
PREVENTION OF T2DM 196
7.1 For people at risk 196
7.2 For people with prediabetes 196
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE
THERAPY IN T2DM 199
8.1 Complementary and alternative
medicine (CAM) 199
8.2 Reporting adverse events 200
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 201
9.1 Guide to Key Performance Indicators
(KPI) 201
9.2 Baseline data collection 202
APPENDIX APPENDIX 1:
MALAYSIAN HEALTHY PLATE 204
APPENDIX 2:
CARBOHYDRATE CONTENT OF COMMON
MALAYSIAN FOODS 205
APPENDIX 3:
FOOD GROUPS AND EXCHANGE LISTS 207
APPENDIX 4:
GLYCAEMIC INDEX OF FOODS 212
APPENDIX 5:
ASSESSMENT PRIOR TO INTENSE
EXERCISE 213
APPENDIX 6:
GRADING OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES AND
METABOLIC EQUIVALENT TARGETS 215
APPENDIX 7:
DOSAGE OF GLUCOSE LOWERING DRUGS
IN CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD) 217
APPENDIX 8:
CARDIOVASCULAR OUTCOMES TRIALS
(CVOTS) 220
APPENDIX 9:
FIBROSIS 4 INDEX 226
APPENDIX 10:
ASSESSMENT OF SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION 227
APPENDIX 11:
IDF-DAR RISK CATEGORIES FOR PATIENTS
WITH T2DM WHO FAST DURING
RAMADAN 229
APPENDIX 12:
ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT OF
TOBACCO USE DISORDER 231
ABBREVIATIONS 232
REFERENCES 235
INTRODUCTION:
TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS,
THE DISEASE
1.1 Background
• Plasma glucose abnormalities may span a progressive continuum ranging
from prediabetes, consisting of impaired fasting glycaemia (IFG) and impaired
glucose tolerance (IGT), to overt diabetes mellitus.
• Prediabetes usually does not cause symptoms and is characterised by
elevated plasma glucose levels that fall below the threshold to diagnose
diabetes. Prediabetes is an important risk factor for future diabetes and
cardiovascular disease (CVD). It is a potentially reversible condition with
lifestyle modification.
• T2DM is the most common form of diabetes mellitus, accounting for >90% of
all cases of adult-onset diabetes mellitus in Malaysia. Both prediabetes and
diabetes commonly coexist with other non-communicable diseases namely
hypertension, dyslipidaemia and obesity.
• With a high and increasing global, and local prevalence, T2DM represents a
huge socio-economic burden due to increased morbidity from accelerated
vascular complications and premature death.
• T2DM is characterised by progressive decline in beta-cell function associated
with insulin resistance in muscle and adipose tissue.
› The insulin resistant state results in increased hepatic glucose output and
reduced utilisation of glucose by various organs contributing to fasting
hyperglycaemia and between meal hyperglycaemia.
› Impaired intestinal incretin secretion causes compromised meal-related
insulin secretion and glucagon suppression contributing to postprandial
hyperglycaemia.
› Excessive renal tubular reabsorption of glucose further contributes to
hyperglycaemia.
• T2DM is an important risk factor for CVD and microvascular complications
such as nephropathy, retinopathy and neuropathy. Other non-vascular
complications include infective complications.
• Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), obstructive sleep apnoea and an
increased risk of certain malignancies are common co-morbidities that are
associated with T2DM.
• The main aim of management is directed at reducing acute and chronic
diabetes-related complications by targeting control of plasma glucose, BP,
lipids and body weight concurrently.
• Recently, there is evidence that reversal or remission of T2DM may be
possible in some individuals with short duration of disease, following reversal
of insulin resistance through significant and sustained weight loss by either
caloric restriction or bariatric surgery.
1.2 Prevalence and state of T2DM in Malaysia
• The National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019 1 (Level II-3) reported a
prevalence of 23.6% for those with abnormal fasting plasma glucose (FPG) in
non-diabetic range (FPG 5.6 mmol/L-6.9 mmol/L) at the time of the survey.
This estimates approximately 5 million (5,019,359) adult individuals in
Malaysia with probable prediabetes in 2019 and future risk of diabetes.
• Prevalence of a known or established diagnosis of diabetes during the 2019
NHMS was 9.4%, whilst in 2015 it was 8.3%. 2 (level II-3) Hence in 2019, there
were almost 2 million (1,999,450) adult individuals with known diabetes in
Malaysia.
• Prevalence of unknown/undiagnosed diabetes (elevated fasting plasma
glucose of ≥7.0 mmol/L during survey) for adults age ≥18 years; in NHMS
2015 and 2019 were 5.1% and 8.9% respectively.1,2 (Level II-3)
› In 2019, there was an estimated 1,892,515 adult individuals with unknown/
undiagnosed diabetes in Malaysia.
› 42% of those with unknown diabetes are between the age of 18-39 years,
and 40% are between the age 40-59 years.
• Overall diabetes prevalence in adults ≥18 years in NHMS 2015 and 2019 was
13.4% and 18.3% respectively. 1,2 (Level II-3) Prevalence for overall diabetes for
adults age 30 years and above was 24.1% in NHMS 2019.
• Prevalence of overall diabetes among the major ethnic groups in the NHMS
2019 showed a similar trend as previous data which was 31.4%, 22.6% and
15.1% among the Indians, Malays and Chinese, respectively.1 (Level II-3)
INTRODUCTION: TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS, THE DISEASE
INTRODUCTION: TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS, THE DISEASE
Table 1-1: Prevalence of overall diabetes by ethnicity for adults ≥18 years
Overall
diabetes
Diagnosed/
Known
diabetes
Raised plasma glucose
≥7mmol/L /
Unknown diabetes
Malay 22.6% 11.1% 10.6%
Chinese 15.1% 8.5% 6.6%
Indians 31.4% 18.5% 12.9%
Bumiputera
Sabah 11.1% 4.7% 6.4%
Bumiputera
Sarawak 12.2% 7.9% 4.3%
Others 8.7% 2.0% 6.7%
Others 8.7% 2.0% 6.7%
Sourced from NHMS 2019.1 (Level II-3)
• Prevalence of overall diabetes is increasing in the young with 4.3% and 5.4%
of those between ages 18-19 years and 20-24 years, respectively.1 (Level II-3)
Table 1-2: Prevalence of overall diabetes by age group
Age Group Overall diabetes
18-19 4.3%
20-24 5.4%
25-29 6.8%
30-34 11.2%
35-39 12.1%
40-44 17.2%
45-49 24.7%
50-54 30.4%
55-59 31.2%
60-64 42.4%
65-69 43.4%
70-74 40.6%
≥75 38.4%
Sourced from NHMS 2019.1 (Level II-3)
• According to the latest NHMS 2019,1 >70% of diagnosed T2DM patients seek
care in Ministry of Health (MoH) primary health clinics.
› As part of the MoH’s quality assurance program for diabetes care at
the primary care level, a Diabetes Clinical Audit is conducted annually
on randomly selected T2DM patients, with data collected through the
National Diabetes Registry (NDR).
› Currently there are 886,138 active T2DM patients on follow-up in MoH
health clinics registered in the NDR.3 (Level II-3)
• From the 2019 Diabetes Clinical Audit, involving 181,627 T2DM patients,
the mean HbA 1c was 7.9%; with 32.4% achieving HbA 1c <6.5%. This was an
improvement from 2013, where the mean HbA 1c was 8.1% and only 20.4%
achieved HbA1c <6.5%.3 (Level II-3)
• Among individuals with known diabetes in the NHMS 2019, it was reported
that 25.7% were treated with insulin, 85.6% with OGLDs and 88.0% had
received advice on diet.
• Insulin use was higher overall in MoH clinics and hospitals compared to private
clinics and hospitals.
Table 1-3: Percentage of patients on insulin by institution
Percentage on insulin
Overall 25.7%
MoH clinic 26.0%
Private clinic 11.5%
MoH hospital 38.3%
Private hospital 30.5%
Sourced from NMHS 2019.1 (Level II-3)
Comorbidities
• From the same 2019 Diabetes Clinical Audit (NDR), the following were
noted:3 (Level II-3)
› prevalence of hypertension was 80.4% (hypertensive or on BP lowering
therapy).
- Mean systolic BP was 135.4 mmHg and diastolic BP was 76.9 mmHg.
- BP <135/75 mmHg was achieved in 29.4% patients.
› prevalence of dyslipidaemia was 74.3% (elevated total cholesterol [TC]
or on lipid-lowering therapy).
- Mean TC was 4.9 mmol/L (<4.5 mmol/L in 39.0%).
- Mean low density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) was 2.9 mmol/L
(<2.6 mmol/L in 45.2%).
INTRODUCTION: TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS, THE DISEASE
› 84.0% of individuals with T2DM are either overweight or obese (Body mass
index [BMI] >23.0 kg/m2).
- Mean BMI was 27.8 kg/m2
- Mean waist circumference in males was 95.2 cm (>90 cm in 69.6%) and in
females was 92.1 cm (>80 cm in 87.8%).
Complications
• In the 2015-2016 annual report of patients admitted with acute coronary
syndrome (National Cardiovascular Disease Database – NCVD-ACS registry),
44.7% of patients were diagnosed to have diabetes. This is the 2nd-most
common CV risk factor; the most prevalent CV risk was hypertension at
63.3%.4 (Level II-3)
• In 2016, diabetic kidney disease (DKD) was the most common cause of end
stage kidney disease (ESKD), accounting for 65% of new patients requiring
dialysis in Malaysia.5 (Level II-3)
Management
Refer to Table 1-4 for a summary of treatment use in individuals with T2DM
based on the 2019 Diabetes Clinical Audit (NDR).3 (Level II-3)
Table 1-4: Summary of treatments used for T2DM management (Diabetes
Clinical Audit, NDR 2019)
Medication
Glucose lowering therapy
Diet alone 5.6%
Most commonly prescribed Metformin
Sulphonylureas
83%
44%
Number of medications OGLD monotherapy
≥2 OGLDs
28.9%
35.1%
Insulin use Overall
In combination with OGLD*
30.3%
23.7%
Anti-hypertensive therapy
Most commonly prescribed Calcium channel blockers
ACE-i
57.7%
51.8%
Other medications
Lipid lowering agents
Anti-platelet agents
Statins
Aspirin
79.9%
19.2%
* Insulin in combination with OGLDs (overall population); the total % of patients on medications do not
add up to 100% due to missing data. OGLDs: oral glucose lowering drugs; ACE-i: angiotensin converting
enzyme inhibitor. Sourced from Diabetes Clinical Audit, NDR.3 (Level II-3)
INTRODUCTION: TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS, THE DISEASE
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
2.1 Objective and strategies
Objective
• To diagnose prediabetes and T2DM among the general population
specifically the high-risk individuals, whilst ensuring prompt and appropriate
intervention.
Strategies
• Screening the general population to identify high-risk individuals.
• Screening of specific high-risk populations e.g. those with history of
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM).
2.2 Who should be screened
• Symptomatic individuals
› Any individual who has symptoms suggestive of T2DM (fatigue, lethargy,
polyuria, nocturia, polydipsia, polyphagia, weight loss, pruritus vulvae,
balanitis) should be investigated to confirm diagnosis of T2DM.6 (Level III)
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Risk-based screening for pre-diabetes and/or T2DM in adults should
be performed in individuals >30 years of age and repeated annually.
• In symptomatic individuals, 1 abnormal result (either plasma glucose/
HbA1c) is diagnostic while in asymptomatic individuals, 2 abnormal
test results from the same sample (e.g. plasma glucose + HbA 1c) or
from 2 separate test samples are accepted for diagnosis.
• Recommendations for criteria-based screening of adolescents who
are overweight and have additional risk factors for T2DM (NEW).
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
• Asymptomatic individuals
› From our National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) data, 1 (Level II-3)
48.6% of individuals with diabetes were undiagnosed at time of screening.
Recognising that up to 50% of individuals with diabetes are asymptomatic
makes the case for screening when specific risk factors are present.
Table 2-1: Criteria for testing for T2DM or prediabetes in asymptomatic adults
A. Women with history of GDM
C. All individuals with prediabetes (HbA 1c ≥5.7%-6.2% [39 mmol/mol44 mmol/mol], IGT, or IGF) should be tested yearly.
B. Adults who are overweight or obese (Body mass index [BMI] ≥23 kg/m2
or waist circumference ≥80 cm for women and ≥90 cm for men) with
ANY of the following*:
• History of CVD
• 1° relatives with T2DM
• Hypertension (BP ≥140/90 mmHg or on therapy for hypertension)
• HDL-C <0.9 mmol/L or TG >2.8 mmol/L
• Women who have delivered a baby weighing ≥4 kg
• Those who were born from mothers with GDM
• Other endocrine conditions associated with insulin resistance e.g.
› PCOS
› Cushing’s syndrome
› Acromegaly
› Phaeochromocytoma
› Presence of acanthosis nigricans
• Physical inactivity and sedentary lifestyle
• Those receiving long-term treatment with any of the following:
› corticosteroids
› anti-retroviral therapy
› atypical anti-psychotic drugs
› thiazide diuretics
› β-adrenergic blockers
› 3-Hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase
inhibitors [statins]
Note: In those without the above risk factors, testing should begin at the age of 30 years.
If tests are normal, screening should be performed annually.7 (Level III)
Adapted from the American Diabetes Association Standards of Care in Diabetes 2020.6 (Level III)
Screening should be performed in adolescents* who are overweight
(85th percentile) or obese (95 th percentile), and who have one or more
additional risk factors such as:
• maternal history of diabetes or GDM during the child’s gestation
• family history of T2DM in a 1° relative
• recurrent abscess and/or pruritus genitalia
• signs of insulin resistance or conditions associated with insulin
resistance (dyslipidaemia, hypertension, polycystic ovary syndrome,
acanthosis nigricans or small for gestational age birth weight)
If tests are normal, repeat screening at a minimum of 3-year intervals,
or more frequently if BMI is increasing.
*After the onset of puberty or after 10 years of age, whichever occurs earlier.
Adapted from the American Diabetes Association Standards of Care in Diabetes 2020.6 (Level III)
Table 2-2: Criteria for testing for T2DM in adolescents
2.3 Screening test
Capillary plasma glucose
• In circumstances where facilities for venous plasma glucose measurements are
not readily available, preliminary screening can be performed by measuring
capillary plasma glucose using standard glucometers.
› This testing can be done irrespective of timing of prior meals.
› If the random capillary plasma glucose ≥7.8 mmol/L or fasting ≥5.6 mmol/L,
a confirmatory test needs to be performed by one of the following methods
- fasting plasma glucose (FPG)
- oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
- HbA 1c
• Screening should be done annually in those listed in Tables 2-1 and 2-2.
2.4 Diagnostic tests
• Fasting plasma glucose
› This should be performed following a minimum of an 8-hour overnight fast.
› Once blood is taken, the sample should not be left standing as the
concentration of glucose decreases due to glycolysis, which degrades
glucose at a rate of 5% to 7% per hour.8 (Level II-2)
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
› This glycolysis can be prevented by using sample tubes containing
glycolysis inhibitors such as citrate buffer.
› Patient is considered to have prediabetes/IFG if the FPG is between 6.16.9 mmol/L and diabetes if the FPG is ≥7.0 mmol/L (Refer Table 2-3 and,
Figures 2-1 and 2-2).
Table 2-3: Diagnostic value for T2DM based on venous plasma glucose
Fasting Random
Venous plasma glucose ≥7.0 mmol/L ≥11.1 mmol/L
In symptomatic individuals, one abnormal glucose value is diagnostic. In asymptomatic individuals, 2
abnormal test results (plasma glucose and HbA1c) from the same sample or from 2 separate test samples
are required for diagnosis.
• Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
› OGTT is done in the fasting state using 75 g of glucose.
› Patient should rest throughout the test and only allowed to drink plain
water.
› A 2-hour plasma glucose of ≥11.1 mmol/L confirms the diagnosis of
diabetes.
› Patient is considered to have IGT of prediabetes if the 2-hour plasma
glucose level is between 7.8-11.0 mmol/L (Refer Table 2-4 and, Figures 2-1
and 2-2).
Table 2-4: Diagnostic value for glucose tolerance and T2DM based on OGTT
OGTT plasma glucose values (mmol/L)
Category 0-hour 2-hour
Normal <6.1 <7.8
IFG 6.1-6.9 IGT - 7.8-11.0
T2DM ≥7.0 ≥11.1
IFG: impaired fasting glucose; IGT: impaired glucose tolerance; T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus. In
adolescents, the glucose load in OGTT is based on body weight (1.75 g/kg body weight, maximum of 75 g).
• HbA 1c
› HbA 1c reflects the average plasma glucose level over the preceding 3
months.9 (Level I)
› Although OGTT used to be the “gold standard” for diagnosing T2DM, it is
known to be poorly reproducible and is cumbersome to perform.10 (Level II-2)
› Standardised HbA 1c assay has been shown to have the least variability
(0.3%-0.4%) compared to fasting and 2-hour plasma glucose levels, 12%
and 20% respectively.11 (Level II-2)
› Using HbA1c to diagnose is convenient as it does not require the individual
to fast or consume oral glucose, and it can be performed at any time of the
day.10-15 (Level II-2)
› Based on the Metabolic Syndrome Study of Malaysia (MSSM) 2009,
involving 4,400 adults, a HbA1c level of 6.3% has a positive predictive value
of 58% and negative predictive value of 84%.
- HbA 1c at this level was found to give the maximal acceptable sum of
specificity and sensitivity of 97% and 42.5%, respectively in diagnosing
T2DM for all three major ethnic groups in this country.
› Diagnosing T2DM based on HbA 1c of 6.5% however leads to a lower
unacceptable sensitivity of 36.7%.
- These data are based on correlation between HbA 1c levels and 75-gram
OGTT results where the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve
obtained was 0.85, consistent with other similar studies.
› Individuals with HbA 1c between 5.7% and 6.2% will be deemed as having
prediabetes.
- At HbA 1c level of 5.7%, the sensitivity and specificity of diagnosing
prediabetes were 78% and 79% respectively.
- If HbA1c is used for the diagnosis of prediabetes, it is best that the test
is followed by an OGTT to classify individuals into either IFG, IGT or
combination of both.16,17 (Level II-2)
- This has prognostic significance in terms of the risk of developing CVD
and conversion to frank T2DM.
Table 2-5: Diagnostic value for prediabetes and T2DM based on HbA1c
Normal Prediabetes T2DM
HbA1c
<5.7%
(<39 mmol/mol)
5.7%-<6.3%
(39-44 mmol/mol)
≥6.3%
(≥45 mmol/mol)
A repeat HbA 1c should be done 4 weeks after the first positive test for asymptomatic patients (if an
accompanying FPG or RPG is indeterminate). For symptomatic patients, a single positive test is sufficient.
FPG: fasting plasma glucose; RPG: random plasma glucose
› There are situations where the HbA1c value may not reflect the true level of
glycaemia (glycation gap) due to various causes (Refer to Section 3.8.1).18,19
- Depending on the method used for measuring HbA 1c, some may give
inaccurate results when the patients have a haemoglobin variant.20,21 (Level III)
» In patients suspected of having haemoglobinopathies, other screening
tests for e.g. another HbA1c methodology should be used (such as the
National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program [NGSP] available
online at http://www.ngsp.org/interf.asp).
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
› HbA 1c is not appropriate for the diagnosis of diabetes in:
- adolescents (<18 years old) since the diagnostic cut-off point was derived
in those >18 years,
- patients taking medication that may cause rapid glucose rise e.g.
steroids, antipsychotics,
- patients taking iron supplements (may falsely lower HbA1c levels),
- patients with acute pancreatic damage, including pancreatic surgery,
- presence of genetic, haematologic and illness-related factors that
influence HbA 1c and its measurement (e.g. haemoglobinopathies,
rheumatoid arthritis, chronic liver disease, post-splenectomy),
- patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) stages 4 or 5 and those on
erythropoietin injections; and
- anaemia due to iron, vitamin B12 or erythropoietin deficiencies.
› HbA 1c reporting and the new SI units
- Glycaemic control in patients with diabetes is assessed using HbA1c.
» The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) and the
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) clearly demonstrated
the correlation of an increasing HbA 1c with the increased risk of
complications.22-24 (Level I)
» Hence, for HbA1c to be useful, it is important that the HbA1c assays are
standardised.
» Several international and national standardisation programs have
evolved over the years to enable the conformity of HbA1c results from
different laboratories to those reported in the DCCT trial.
- In 1994, the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory
Medicine (IFCC) Working Group on Standardisation of HbA 1c developed
a global HbA 1c reference system with a much improved intra-assay and
inter-assay coefficients of variation of <2.5%.25 (Level II-1)
- For the purpose of diagnosis, the HbA 1c test should be performed using
the method that is certified by the NGSP-HbA1c units (%) and standardised
according to the assays employed in the DCCT study. Recommendations
have been made on the reporting of HbA1c results as IFCC-HbA1c values in
SI units (mmol HbA1c/mol Hb) [Refer to Section 3.8.1 and Table 3-21]
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
Figure 2-1: Screening for T2DM in symptomatic individuals
Screening of symptomatic individuals – A single abnormal VPG value or 1 abnormal HbA 1c is sufficient to
make the diagnosis of T2DM.
T2DM: Type 2 diabetes mellitus; OGTT: oral glucose tolerance test. For diagnostic values based on OGTT,
refer to Table 2-4.
SYMPTOMATIC
Venous plasma glucose
<7.0 mmol/L <11.1 mmol/L≥7.0 mmol/L
T2DM
Fasting Random
OGTT OGTT
≥11.1 mmol/L
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
ASYMPTOMATIC
Capillary plasma glucose
<5.6 <7.8
<6.1
<6.1 6.1 to 6.9 ≥7.0
6.1 to 6.9
Normal Normal
>7.8≥5.6
≥7.0
<7.0 ≥7.0
Fasting VPG Random VPG
Fasting Random
<7.8 7.8 to 11.0
NormalNormal
Normal IFG T2DM
<7.8 7.8 to 11.0 ≥11.1
Normal IGT T2DM
OGTT
OGTT
FPG 2-hour FPG
T2DM T2DM
Repeat FPG Repeat VPG
≥11.1
≥11.1
All glucose levels are in mmol/L.
Screening of asymptomatic individuals – Diagnosis of T2DM is made when there are 2 abnormal VPG on
separate occasions or 1 abnormal VPG + 1 abnormal HbA1c (from the same sample) values.
VPG: venous plasma glucose; FPG: fasting plasma glucose; OGTT: oral glucose tolerance test; T2DM: type 2
diabetes mellitus; PPG: post-prandial glucose; IGT: impaired glucose tolerance; IFG: impaired fasting glucose.
Figure 2-2: Screening for T2DM in asymptomatic individuals
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
2.5 Cardiovascular risk estimation
• It is well established that patients with prediabetes and T2DM have a 2-3-fold
increased risk of developing CVD.
• 60% of patients with T2DM will eventually die from CV complications.
• As such, it is prudent that the CV risk profiles be determined at diagnosis of
prediabetes and T2DM as well as during each clinic visit.
• Those who are in the high-risk group should have their T2DM and other CVD
risk factors treated aggressively with closer monitoring.
Recommendations: Screening and diagnosis
1. Screening for diabetes using FPG or HbA1c should be
performed annually in those with risk factors and
those ≥30 years.
Grade C
2. Diagnosis of T2DM and prediabetes can be made
using FPG or RPG, OGTT or HbA1c. Grade B
3. In individuals with a FPG of ≥6.1 to 6.9 mmol/L or
HbA1c between 5.7% to 6.2% further testing with
a 75-g OGTT should be considered in order to
categorise them into individuals with IGT or T2DM.
Grade C
4. Patients diagnosed with T2DM should have other
CVD risk factors treated aggressively with close
monitoring.
Grade B
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2
DIABETES MELLITUS
3.1 Initial assessment
• At diagnosis of T2DM:
› a detailed history which focuses on a few key issues which will affect
treatment decision should be undertaken apart from assessing for
symptoms and presentation of diabetes (Refer Table 3-1).26
› full physical examination (including fundoscopy and monofilament test)
and baseline investigations should be performed to assess for presence of
ASCVD risk factors and complications of diabetes.
• Management is based on results of the above.26
• Diabetes management involves lifestyle modification, medications and
patient education to encourage self-care and empowerment.27,28 (Level I) 29,30 (Level III)
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Importance of categorizing patients at initial visit, in particular with
regard to presence of co-morbidities; i.e. CV, renal complications,
quality of life assessments, as it will help in deciding management
plans.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Assessment
Table 3-1: Detailed assessment of a newly diagnosed patient with T2DM.
T2DM history
• Characteristics at onset (e.g. age, symptoms)
• Increased thirst (polydipsia)
• Polyphagia
• Polyuria and/or nocturia
• Malaise/fatigue
• Weight loss/gain – some patients may gain weight
and develop diabetes e.g. in Cushing’s Syndrome.
• Altered vision
• Frequent and recurrent infections
• Assessment of frequency/cause/severity of past
hospitalisation
• Assessment of history of macrovascular and
microvascular complications:
› ASCVD symptoms
› neurological symptoms
› visual disturbances
› renal related symptoms
› foot problems
› sexual dysfunction
• Screening for depression, anxiety and eating
disorder
• Identifying existing social barriers and support
Predisposition to
T2DM
• Age over 30 years
• Family history
• Ethnic group
• Overweight/obese
• Lifestyle:
› dietary habits
› level of physical inactivity
› smoking
› alcohol consumption
› occupation
› sleep behaviour31
• Hypertension
• Dyslipidaemia
• Obstetric history of large babies or gestational
diabetes
• Women with polycystic ovarian syndrome
• Medications that impact weight and glycaemic
status
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Co-morbidities
• Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
• Cognitive impairment/dementia
• Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA)
• Pancreatitis
• Periodontal disease
• Low testosterone/hypogonadism in men
• Cancers
Medications and
vaccinations
• Review of treatment regimens and response (if
defaulted previously)
• Medication taking behaviour
• Medication intolerance or side effects
• Complementary and alternative medicine use
• Vaccination status (influenza and pneumococcal
vaccination)32
Referrals
• Annual dilated eye exam (Refer Section 5.1)
• Family planning for women of reproductive age (if
and when desired)
• Registered dietitian for medical nutrition therapy
(Refer Section 3.5.1)
• Diabetes self-management education and support
• Dentist for comprehensive dental and periodontal
examination (Refer Section 5.9)
• Mental health professional, if indicated (Refer
Section 5.8)
• Immunisation
• Smoking cessation
• Cancer screening
Risks affecting
treatment decision
and individualised
target
• Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD)
• Heart failure
• Renal impairment (Diabetic kidney disease; DKD)
• Hypoglycaemia
Adapted from A Consensus Report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD) 2019.33 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-2: Physical examination of newly diagnosed patient with T2DM
Weight/waist
measurement
• Body mass index (BMI) = weight (kg) / height2 (m2)
• Waist circumference (WC)
• Growth/pubertal development in adolescents
CV system
• Blood pressure (supine and standing)
• Neck and peripheral pulses
• Precordial examination
Eye
(Refer Section 5.1)
• Visual acuity with refraction (with corrected vision)
• Dilated retinal examination/photography (for
retinopathy)
• Cataract
Feet
(Refer Section 5.6)
• Skin integrity
• Pressure areas/callus formation
• Ulcer
• Toenails
• Interdigital lesions
• Foot deformities (structure/Charcot’s joint)
• Skin sensation
• Pedal pulses (dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial)
Peripheral nerves
(Refer Section 5.3)
• Tendon reflexes
• Sensation: touch (e.g. with 10-g monofilament)
• Vibration (e.g. with 128-Hz tuning fork)
Table 3-3: Investigations for a newly diagnosed patient with T2DM.
Baseline
• Fasting plasma glucose (FPG)
• HbA 1c
• Renal profile
• Lipid profile
• Liver function test
• Urinalysis for albumin, microalbuminuria if
albuminuria is absent
• ECG
Aims of treatment
• The overall aims of management are to:
› improve quality of life
› reduce complications; and
› prevent premature death.
• Patient and family members should be counselled by identifying and
addressing concerns which may cause distress, thus adversely affecting
management.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Short-term aims
• Relief of symptoms and acute complications
Long-term aims
• Achievement of appropriate glycaemic levels with lifestyle management
including weight reduction (where appropriate) and maintain durability
of glycaemic control
• Reduction of other CV risk factors
• Identification and treatment of chronic complications
• Optimise quality of life
• Most of the microvascular complications of T2DM are related to the degree
and the length of exposure to hyperglycaemia.23,34 (Level I)
• The legacy effect/metabolic memory of early glycaemic control is well
established in reducing both micro- and macrovascular complications.23,34 (Level I)
This should be emphasized in all patients with newly diagnosed T2DM.
• Multiple risk factor reduction (the ABC’s for T2DM) has been shown to reduce
long term complications and mortality sustained beyond the intervention
phase.35,36 (Level I) These are:
› A – HbA1c (glycaemic control)
› B – BP control
› C – Cholesterol (lipid control)
3.2 Diabetes education
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Diabetes self-management education and support continues to be
an essential part of ensuring patient motivation and adherence.
• Local primary healthcare diabetes education programs run as part
of a chronic care model has been shown to be effective in improving
glycaemic targets.
• Structured diabetes education programs that are patient-centred
have been shown to improve glycaemic control; use of newer
technology, e.g. digital web-based apps/short-messaging system
(SMS) or phone calls further encourage patient participation.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Diabetes education is effective in improving clinical outcomes and QoL 37-39
(Level I) and their family members and carers should be involved as well.
• Diabetes education should be offered in a timely manner and suggested at
four critical times for self-management education and support:6,40-42 (Level III)
› at diagnosis,
› annually,
› when complicating factors arise; and
› when transitions in care occur.
• Any member of the diabetes health team who has adequate training can
deliver Diabetes Self-Management Education (DSME) with the physician as
the head of team and coordinator.42 (Level III)
• The more the duration (frequency and length) of contact time between the
educator and the patient, the better the HbA1c reduction.37 (Level II-1)
• Provision of individual empowerment and self-management education
strategies should be considered to enhance self-efficacy, self-care, selfmanagement and motivation.6,40,42-45 (Level III)
• Structured diabetes education and support should be patient-centred, may
be given in group or individual setting and/or using technology, for the
purpose of improving self-management and self-empowerment.6 (Level III)
• Diabetes Self-Management Support (SMS) 6,40,42,45 (Level III) such as coaching
via monthly telephone calls improves glycaemic control and compliance
to complication screening. Interventions that encourage patient’s active
participation such as patient empowering group education and automatic
telephone management program has been found to result in better
outcomes.46,47 (Level I) 48 (Level II-1)
• Diabetes Education as part of the Chronic Care Model (CCM) has been shown
to improve HbA1C in primary healthcare clinic settings in Malaysia.
› Incorporating diabetes education in the form of a structured and scheduled
diabetes education program by a dedicated team, in a pragmatic, clusterrandomised, parallel, matched pair, controlled trial achieved significant
HbA1C of <6.5%, adjusted OR 2.16 (95% CI 1.34,3.50), p<0.002.49 (Level II-2)
• The design of a CCM’s delivery system that incorporates diabetes education
was reported to have the largest impact in improving patient outcomes (mean
reduction of HbA1c by 0.46% (95% CI 0.38, 0.54) 50 (Level I) 51,52 (Level II) followed by
CCMs that incorporate self-management support.50 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-4: Diabetes education
Scope of diabetes education
• Self-Management Education
› Diet
› Food exchanges
› Exercise
› Medication
› Complications (acute and
chronic)
› SMBG
› Self-monitoring of BP and weight
› Foot care
› Smoking cessation
› Problem solving skills e.g.
management of hypoglycaemia,
sick days
› Psychosocial adaptation to
diabetes e.g. to manage the
stress associated with the initial
diagnosis of diabetes or its
complications and initiation of
insulin
• Self-Management Support
› Telephone contact
› Digital/web-based/apps
› Diabetes resource centres
• Patient/Peer Support Organisation
Adapted from IDF Global Guideline for Type 2 Diabetes 2012, 53 (Level II-2) DAA & ADEA Joint Position
Statement 2009,30 (Level II-2) Boule N et al 2003,54 (Level I) Boule N et al 2001,55 (Level I) Skovlund S et al 2005,56 (Level
II-2) Hill-Briggs F et al 2007,57 (Level III) Lustman P et al 2000.58 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 3-1: Process of Diabetes Self-Management Education (DSME)
Members of HCP team include: Diabetes educator, nurse, dietitian, doctor,
pharmacist, health education officer, assistant medical officers and psychologist.
Behaviour change
• adherence to
lifestyle (diet,
weight reduction,
physical activity,
smoking cessation)
• adherence to
medication
• identifying and
overcoming barriers
• adherence to risk
reduction behaviour
e.g. home footcare
practice and regular
eye screening
Outcome
measure
Individualised based
on
• prior knowledge
and experience with
T2DM
• health literacy
• health belief
• preferred learning
style
• psychosocial issues
that include cultural,
religious preference
and readiness for
change
Process
Clinical evaluation and
treatment plan
• assessment
• goal setting
• planning
implementation
• evaluation/
monitoring
• focusing on
individualised needs
and goals
Components/
Objectives
T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus. Adapted from American Association of Diabetes Educator. 2017.59 (Level III)
• Health education, diet therapy, exercise and adherence to medications must
be reinforced regularly at every follow-up.29,39 (Level I)
3.3 Team approach
• Patient-centred comprehensive care requires a multi-disciplinary team of
healthcare providers.
› Working with healthcare providers with different skills and specialities
allows the patient to gain in-depth knowledge and understanding of their
T2DM.60 (Level III)
› It also ensures that:
- the patient’s needs are addressed,
- it avoids therapeutic inertia; and
- it prioritises timely and appropriate intensification of lifestyle and/or
pharmacologic therapy.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• For the patient to accept responsibility for self-care they must understand
the disease, its effect on health and the necessity of management. Good
communication between team members is important to ensure consistent
advice and avoid confusing the patient.60 (Level III)
• Teams working together help patients to:6,60 (Level III) 61 (Level II-2)
› get appropriate medical tests and examinations (e.g. plasma glucose level,
BP, lipid level, weight, eye and foot examinations),
› make healthy behaviour and lifestyle choices (e.g. improved diet, increased
physical activity, cessation of smoking),
› use medications to manage and control risk factors (e.g. plasma glucose,
BP, lipids),
› self-manage and adhere to treatment,
› prevent diabetes-related complications,
› improve QoL.
• Evidence 62-64 (Level II-2) shows that these interventions are able to:
› improve patients’ glucose, BP and lipid levels,
› increase proportion of patients who reach target plasma glucose, BP and
lipid levels,
› improve patients’ diabetes related QoL and general physical, and mental
health.
The following professionals are important team members in the multidisciplinary management of T2DM.
Diabetes educator
• Diabetes nurse educators cover all topics related to T2DM management
including knowledge, skills and health beliefs/perceptions regarding:
› healthy eating,
› physical activity,
› self-monitoring,
› medication usage, goal setting,
› problem solving,
› risk reduction practices such as foot care, smoking cessation and keeping
follow-up medical appointments; and
› healthy coping to assess presence of diabetes distress, anxiety and
depression.
• They often have more time than doctors to allocate to each patient, which
permits them to emphasize on specific needs.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Dietitian
• Referral to a dietitian is required to ensure detailed dietary education.
• Dietitians help patients develop healthful eating plans, appropriate to
individual needs and circumstances.
• In addition, they can help identify and address problems such as disordered
meal patterns, timing of meals, eating disorders and other physiological and
psychosocial problems.
• These issues may not be readily identified during doctor office visits.
• The other team members also need to understand the principles of dietary
advice to assist in reinforcing dietary recommendations (Refer Section 3.5.1).
Registered Nurses and Assistant Medical Officers
• Registered nurses and assistant medical officers can provide assessments
before the doctor sees the patient, which allows for a better focus on any
identified problems.
• Teaching medication administration is another important area that can be
delegated to them.
• In addition, these healthcare providers can make follow-up phone calls to
assess medication administration/adherence, medication tolerability, and
other related diabetes management issues.
Physician/Endocrinologist/Diabetologist
• The advice of a specialist physician may be valuable for patients with
complicated problems related to T2DM.
• These patients may present with poorly controlled diabetes despite the
standard care and the onset of various complications.
• A shared care approach by the primary care practitioner and specialist will
provide the best combination of expertise and continuity of care to the
patient.
Pharmacist
• Pharmacists play a role in ensuring adherence and giving information about
medications’ mode of action and side effects.
• They may undertake special tasks of training the patients to administer and
adjust insulin dosing.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist
• Referral to an ophthalmologist/optometrist is required for further assessment
and management of retinopathy and other eye problems (Refer Section 5.1).
Oral health professional
• Dental and periodontal problems are common in patients with T2DM with a
long established bi-directional influence reported.65 (Level II-2)
• People with T2DM tend to have poorer oral hygiene and more severe gingival
and periodontal diseases6 (Level III) that:
› may contribute to worsening of glycaemic control;61 (Level III) 66 (Level II-2) and
› is a major cause of tooth loss, nutritional compromise, altered speech, low
self-esteem and a poorer overall quality of life.67 (Level II-2)
• Therefore, referrals should be done routinely for oral healthcare (Refer
Section 5.9).68,69 (Level II-2) 70 (Level III)
Recommendations: Assessment, aims of treatment and
education
1. All newly diagnosed T2DM need to be reviewed
by a medical doctor in which screening for other
cardiovascular risks need to be carried out.
Grade C
3. All patients should be referred for a formal diabetes
education preferably delivered by a multidisciplinary
healthcare professional team.
Grade A
4. The type of education, content, duration and revision
frequencies will depend on needs of the patients and
the resources available at the health care centre.
Grade C
2. The significance of the legacy effects/metabolic
memory of good glucose control should be
emphasized to all newly diagnosed diabetic patients.
Grade A
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.4 Targets for control
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• The importance of achieving optimal body weight with lifestyle
modification is emphasized in overweight/obese T2DM individuals.
• HbA 1c targets: glycaemic targets have been revised according to
individual characteristics.
• BP targets are revised to 130-139/70-79 mmHg.
• Lipid (LDL-C) targets according to CV risk i.e. moderate risk <2.6
mmol/L; high-risk <1.8 mmol/L; very high-risk <1.4 mmol/L (refer to
Table 3-27).
Table 3-5: Targets for control
Parameters Levels
Glycaemic
control*
Fasting or pre-prandial 4.4 mmol/L-7.0 mmol/L
Post-prandial 4.4 mmol/L-8.5 mmol/L **
HbA1c
<7.0% (for most)
≤6.5 %***
Lipids
Triglycerides ≤1.7 mmol/L
HDL-C Male: >1.0 mmol/L
Female: >1.2 mmol/L
LDL-C ≤2.6 mmol/L#
BP ≤130-139/70-79 mmHgˆˇ
Exercise 150 minutes/week
Body weight If overweight or obese, aim for up to 10% weight loss in
6 months
* Modified from the NICE guideline: Type 2 diabetes: The management of type 2 diabetes, 2014. 41 (Level III)
Glycaemic target should be individualised to minimise risk of hypoglycaemia.71 (Level I)
** Measured at least 90 minutes after meals.
*** HbA1c ≤6.5% is advocated for patients with a shorter duration of T2DM, no evidence of significant
CVD and longer life expectancy, and have minimal risk of hypoglycaemia.
# In individuals with established CVD, LDL-C target is 1.4 mmol/L (Refer Table 3-26: LDL-C targets)
� Target SBP to 130-139 mmHg - <130 mmHg if tolerated in individuals without pre-existing coronary
heart disease and who are at higher risk of stroke or DKD, but not to <120 mmHg.
� Target DBP to 70-79 mmHg, but not <70 mmHg.
HDL-C: high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LDL-C: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; BP: blood
pressure; CVD: cardiovascular disease; DKD: diabetic kidney disease; SBP: systolic blood pressure; DBP:
diastolic blood pressure.
Lipids: Refer Section 3.9.2; BP: Refer Section 3.9.1; Exercise: Refer Section 3.5.2; Body weight: Refer
Sections 3.5.1 and 3.9.3.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-6: Individualised HbA1c targets based on patient profile.
≤6.5 % (Tight) 6.6%-7.0% 7.1%-8.0% (Less tight)
• Newly and
recently
diagnosed*
• Younger age
• Healthier (long
life expectancy,
no CVD
complications)
• On medications
that do not cause
hypoglycaemia
• Albuminuria - nil
• Low risk of
hypoglycaemia
• All others • Elderly patients
• Presence of co-morbidities:
› advanced CVD
› coronary artery disease
› heart failure
› advanced renal failure
(eGFR <45 ml/min/1.73 m2)
› decompensated chronic
liver disease
› dementia
› bed-bound e.g. stroke/
other co-morbidities
• Prone to/experiencing
severe hypoglycaemia
• Hypoglycaemia
unawareness
• High risk of consequence of
hypoglycaemia such as:
› those at risk of falling,
› those who drive or
operate machinery.
• Those unlikely to benefit
from strict glycaemic
control
• Short life expectancy
CVD: cardiovascular disease; eGFR: estimated glomerular filtration rate; T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus.
* Newly diagnosed is arbitrarily defined as T2DM <1-year duration and recently diagnosed is defined as
T2DM duration of <5 years.
Adapted from American Diabetes Association 2020; EASD 2019, NICE 2019 and Canadian 2018
guidelines.6,40,43,72 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Medical nutrition therapy (MNT) with weight loss can prevent T2DM
• Structured lifestyle intervention incorporating partial diet
replacement can improve HbA1c, lipid profile and BP.
• A total diet replacement with weight loss of up to 15% body weight
(approximately 15 kg) can lead to diabetes remission.
• A healthful eating pattern with low glycaemic index (GI) diet may
be relevant in the Malaysian context because excessive rise in postprandial glycaemia is frequently observed.
3.5 Lifestyle modification
3.5.1 Medical nutrition therapy (MNT)
Medical nutrition therapy (MNT) is important in preventing diabetes, managing
existing diabetes, and delaying complications. Proper diet is crucial at all stages
of management of diabetes including those on medication. The need for
medical therapy should not be interpreted as a failure of lifestyle management
but as an adjunct to it.
General recommendations
• Nutrition care by a dietitian should be provided under the following
conditions: at diagnosis, sub-optimal metabolic and/or weight control, at
initiation of insulin therapy, development of other co-morbidities such as
hyperlipidaemia, hypertension and DKD.73 (Level I)
• Individualised dietary counselling by a dietitian is effective to lower HbA 1c
up to 2.0% in 6 months, reduce weight, CV risk, lower medication use and
improve quality of life (QoL).6,74,75 (Level I)
• The goals of MNT are to:
› improve HbA1c, BP, cholesterol levels, achieve and maintain body weight
goals,
› promote healthful eating patterns in appropriate portion sizes and limiting
food choices only when supported by scientific evidence,
› provide nutrition needs based on cultural preferences, health literacy and
numeracy, willingness and ability to make behavioural changes.73 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Specific recommendations
A. Prevention of T2DM
The following diet and lifestyle changes are recommended for individuals with
BMI >23 kg/m 2 (overweight) or >27.5 kg/m 2 (obese) who have prediabetes or
are at risk for diabetes:
• Weight loss of ≥7%-10% of initial body weight within 6 months has been
proven to be effective for diabetes prevention.(Level I) This can be achieved by:
› reducing calorie intake of 500-1000 kcal/day from baseline 76 (Level I) E.g. aim
for intake of 1200-1500 kcal/day for women and 1500-1800 kcal/day for
men,77 (Level I)
› including ≥150 minutes/week of moderate to vigorous intensity physical
activity e.g. 30 minutes of brisk walking for 5 days or more per week,78 (Level I)
› a combination of reduced calorie diet, physical activity and behaviour
modification can provide greater initial weight loss,78 (Level I)
› using meal replacement plans (MRPs) as part of a structured meal plan for
weight loss and weight maintenance.79 (Level I)
• A healthy dietary plan that includes:
› a high fibre diet (20-30 g fibre/day) by choosing plant-based foods such
as vegetables, fruits, legumes and whole grain cereals 80,81 (Level II-2) has been
shown to reduce risk of T2DM.
- In several prospective cohort studies, a higher intake of vegetables,
fruits, substituting white rice with brown rice and wholemeal bread may
reduce risk of T2DM.82-84 (Level II-2)
- Whole grains should form 50% of the total grain intake as recommended
by the Malaysian Dietary Guidelines, 2020.85 (Level III)
› avoiding consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages (SSB). 86 (Level II-2)
Replacing SSB with plain water has been shown to reduce risk of T2DM in a
cohort study.87 (Level II-2)
› a low fat intake to reduce body weight and improve glucose levels has
been shown to be effective in several diabetes prevention RCTs.88 (Level I)
› limiting intake of saturated fat, such as limiting red meat and processed
meat consumption, has been shown to reduce risk of T2DM.89 (Level II-2)
› following the Malaysian Healthy Plate Model may help increase consumption
of vegetables and fruits and control portion size of meals. 90 (Level III) (Refer
Appendix 1)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
B. Management of T2DM
• Weight management
› Individuals who are overweight (BMI >23.0 kg/m2 - <27.5 kg/m2) and obese
(>27.5 kg/m 2) and not achieving glycaemic control should restrict their
caloric intake with the goal of reducing body weight by at least 5%-10%.(Level I)
› Structured lifestyle intervention and:
- MRP have been shown to be effective in lowering HbA1c, lipid profile and
BP.91-94 (Level I)
- total diet replacement (TRP) (≤800 kcal/day) inducing weight loss up
to 15% (approximately 15 kg) from baseline has been shown to lead to
diabetes remission in T2DM patients.95 (Level I)
• Overall macronutrient distribution
› There is no ideal percentage of calories from carbohydrate (CHO), protein
and fat for people with T2DM. A balanced diet consisting of 45%-60% of
energy from CHO, 15%-20% energy from protein and 25%-35% energy
from fat is encouraged.96 (Level III)
› These recommendations must be individualised based on weight, glycaemic
and other metabolic goals, cultural preferences and individual lifestyle.
i. Amount and type of carbohydrates (CHO)
- Monitoring the total amount of CHO intake remains a key strategy in
achieving glycaemic control.97 (Level I)
» Total amount of CHO intake can be monitored using grams,
exchange list, household or hand measures as long as it is practical
for patients to comprehend and follow.
» It is prudent to individualise the distribution of the total CHO
exchanges allowed in a day into meals according to the patient’s
lifestyle. The current practical guide98 (Level III) is provided below:
Table 3-7: Guide to CHO exchanges for adult male and female.
Individuals CHO exchanges (per meal)
Inactive women 2 to 4
Active women or inactive men 3 to 5
Active men 4 to 6
CHO exchanges (snacks)
Between meal snacks 1 to 2
CHO: carbohydrate.
Adapted from American Dietetic Association Guide to Diabetes Medical Nutrition Therapy and Education;
2005.98
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
» CHO intake must be kept consistent on a day-to-day basis if the
patient is on diet therapy alone, OGLDs or fixed insulin regime.99 (Level I)
» If the patient is adjusting their meal-time insulin doses or on insulin
pump (i.e. flexible insulin dosing) consistency is not required. Insulin
doses should be adjusted to match CHO intake. Self-monitoring
of blood glucose (SMBG) is essential to adjust the insulin dose
according to CHO intake.100 (Level I)
- A minimum of 130 g/day CHO should be provided to ensure adequate
intake of fibre, vitamins, and minerals, as well as to prevent ketosis
and to provide dietary palatability.101 (Level I)
- CHO intake should emphasize nutrient-dense CHO sources that are
high in fibre, including vegetables, fruits, legumes, whole grains, as
well as dairy products.96 (Level II-2)
- Sucrose (e.g. table sugar) intake must be counted as part of the total
CHO intake.102 (Level III) Excess sucrose intake contributes to calories and
may cause weight gain.103 (Level II-2)
- Sugar substitutes (high-intensity sweeteners, artificial sweeteners,
nonnutritive sweeteners, and low-calorie sweeteners) do not impact
glycaemic level.103,104 (Level II-2)
» These include saccharin, neotame, acesulfame-K, aspartame,
sucralose, advantame, stevia, and luo han guo (or monk fruit).
» Replacing added sugars with sugar substitutes will decrease daily
intake of CHO and calories. Intake should not exceed acceptable
daily intake (ADI) levels.
» There is insufficient evidence that such sugar substitutes cause
harm or increase the risk of diabetes.
ii. Glycaemic index
- GI is a measure to classify types of CHO based on their effect on
plasma glucose level. It is a ranking system that indicates how quickly
CHO foods raise plasma glucose level. Foods with high GI value raise
plasma glucose more than food with medium or low GI.
- Substituting high GI foods with lower GI foods during meals reduces
post-prandial plasma glucose (PPG), and modestly improves HbA1c by
(-)0.14%-(-)0.5%,105-108 (Level I) provided the energy and total CHO intake
are not excessive. A lower GI diet may be relevant in the Malaysian
context because excessive rise in PPG is frequently observed.
- Two recent systematic reviews regarding GI showed that studies
which are longer than 12 weeks report no significant influence of
glycaemic index or glycaemic load independent of weight loss on
HbA1c; however, mixed results have been reported for fasting glucose
levels and endogenous insulin levels. 96,105,109 (Level I) Further studies are
needed to verify the benefits of low GI diets.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
iii. Low CHO diets
- Reducing overall CHO intake for individuals with diabetes is not
beneficial in the long-term. Benefits of lowering HbA1c, triglycerides,
promoting weight loss and lowering BP is only demonstrated in shortterm studies of <6 months duration with a high risk of bias.110 (Level I)
» Changes in weight, lipid profiles and BP did not differ significantly
between groups eating <40% energy (en) CHO vs. >40% en CHO.
» Long-term adherence and sustainability to a low-CHO eating plan
is generally poor. In addition, there is variability in the definition of
low CHO diet e.g. American Dietetic Association definition:
º very low: <26% en CHO;
º low: 26%-45% en CHO and
º high CHO: >45% en CHO.
The variability in definitions make studies’ results difficult to
interpret.
» A healthful eating pattern which is low in saturated fat, low in
sodium, high in fruits and vegetables and wholegrain cereals will
still need to be recommended when following a low-CHO diet.
» A very low CHO diet such as ketogenic diet (<50 g CHO) are
discouraged due to challenges with long-term sustainability and
nutrient imbalances of high fat content, excessive fibre intake and
micronutrient deficiencies.111 (Level III) It is also unsafe for specific groups
such as those with renal disease or disordered eating behaviours,
and those taking SGL T2-i due to potential risk of ketoacidosis.112,113
(Level III)
» Meal plans that meet individualised caloric goals with a
macronutrient distribution that is consistent with usual eating
pattern is recommended for long-term achievement of glycaemia,
lipids and weight goals.113 (Level III)
iv. Protein
- In patients with normal renal function, usual protein intake of 15%20% energy has minimal effect on glycaemic control.114 (Level I)
- It is recommended to include lean sources of protein such as lean
meat, fish, chicken/poultry without skin and soy protein.114 (Level I)
- In patients with impaired renal function, protein restriction of 0.81.0 g/kg body weight/day may be recommended.115 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
v. Fats
- Patients with T2DM should limit total fat (25%-35% energy intake),
saturated fats (<7% energy intake) and minimise trans-fat (<1%
energy intake) for prevention and treatment of CVD.75,116 (Level I)
- A healthy diet incorporating oats, nuts and legumes, green leafy
vegetables and soy protein may be beneficial for cardiovascular
health.116 (Level I)
• Sodium
› In normotensive and hypertensive patients, a reduced sodium intake
(<2,000 mg sodium/day or 5 g of salt a day or 1 teaspoon) with a diet high
in fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy products lowers BP.117 (Level I)
• Dietary supplements and diabetes-specific formulas
› Patients with T2DM have the same vitamin and mineral requirements as
the general population.
- There is no clear evidence of benefit from the use of antioxidant
vitamins A, C, E, D, selenium, chromium, herbs and omega-3 fatty acids in
improving glycaemic control.118-120 (Level I)
› Diabetes-specific oral nutritional supplement (ONS) beverages or formulas
may be prescribed for malnourished patients who are unable or have not
been eating well for prolonged periods of time or these beverages are
used as MRP for weight loss.75 (Level III)
• Intermittent fasting (IF) and time-restricted diets (TRE)
› In IF, the eating period is restricted, with an unintentional reduction in
calorie intake. TRE involves consuming all calories within a consistent 8 h12 h daily timespan.
› Due to limited evidence and small-scale studies, the effectiveness of IF and
TRE in diabetes management is uncertain and not significantly different
from conventional calorie-restricted diets.121-124 (Level I)
Refer to Appendices 2-4 on CHO foods, food exchange list and Glycaemic Index
list.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations: Medical nutrition therapy
1. Medical nutritional therapy is the mainstay of
prevention and treatment of T2DM. Proper diet
is crucial at all stages of management of diabetes
including those on medication.
Grade A
2. For obese and overweight patients, weight loss of up
to 10% of initial body weight over a 6-month period is
recommended to prevent T2DM.
Grade A
3. A healthful eating pattern i.e. low in saturated fat,
low in sodium, high in fruits, vegetables, wholegrain
cereals and legumes is recommended for prediabetes
and T2DM patients.
Grade B
4. Meal plans that meet individualised caloric goals with
a macronutrient distribution that is consistent with a
healthful eating pattern is recommended for long-term
achievement of glycaemia, lipids and weight goals.
Grade B
3.5.2 Physical activity
• Increased physical activity can improve glycaemic control, assist with weight
maintenance, and reduce the risk of CVD.55
• Combining physical activity with dietary intervention results in greater HbA1c
reduction.
• Mild to moderate exercise is generally safe but before beginning a program
of vigorous physical activity, people with T2DM should be assessed for
complications that may preclude vigorous exercise (CVD, retinopathy,
neuropathy and foot injury).125 (Level II-2)
• In older patients, previously sedentary, long-standing T2DM, patients with
multiple risk factors, and patients with previous evidence of atherosclerotic
disease should be considered for pre-exercise assessment (Refer Appendix
5). (Level III)
• The patient should choose an activity that he or she is likely to maintain.
Walking is accessible to most patients in terms of time and financial
expenditure.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Individuals should exercise at least 3 times/week, preferably most days of the
week and with no more than 48-72 hours without physical activity,6 (Level III) as the
insulin-sensitising effect of an acute bout of exercise does not last beyond this
duration126 (Level II-2) 127,128 (Level III) while, the improved insulin sensitivity of regular
exercise training persists for up to 5 days after inactivity.126 (Level II-2) 129 (Level I)
• For patients with T2DM, supervised exercise programs have been particularly
effective in improving glycaemic control, reducing the need for OGLDs and
insulin, and producing modest but sustained weight loss.130,131 (Level I)
• Both aerobic and resistance exercise are beneficial for patients with diabetes,
and it is optimal to do both types of exercise.
• The duration of exercise should be at least 150 minutes/week of moderate
intensity or at least 75 minutes/week of vigorous aerobic physical
activity125,132,133 (Level I) and at least 2 sessions per week of resistance exercise130
(Level I) (Refer Appendix 6 for exercise examples).
• Greater reduction in HbA 1c
133 (Level I) and CV complications 134 (Level II-2) can be
achieved with higher duration of exercise. It is therefore recommended
to aim for a higher duration of exercise (300 minutes/week of moderate
intensity) for those who are able to do so.
› 0.9% mean HbA 1c reduction with >150 minutes/week vs. 0.4% reduction
with moderate intensity exercise <150 minutes/week.
› 20% reduction in CHD risk with 300 minutes/week vs. 14% risk reduction
with moderate-intensity exercise 150 minutes/week.
• Duration of exercise should be increased to ≥60 minutes per day/
approximately 450 minutes per week in overweight or obese patients to
facilitate weight reduction.135 (Level III)
• Any increase in daily energy expenditure is beneficial (Refer Appendix 6 for
metabolic equivalent targets). (Level III)
There are many Malaysians with T2DM on basal bolus insulin regimen. There is
limited data/evidence to guide recommendations for adjustment of glucoselowering therapy in T2DM during exercise. The risk of hypoglycaemia with
exercise in T2DM is much lower compared to patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM).136 (Level II-2)
• However, risk of hypoglycaemia with exercise should still be considered in
T2DM patients on SU therapy or insulin, as the hypoglycaemic effects of SU is
increased with exercise137 (Level II-2) and a small number of individuals on insulin
may develop hypoglycaemia with exercise.138 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Consideration of glycaemic pattern as part of individualised assessment is
advised and treatment changes will depend on duration and intensity of the
exercise, existing glucose-lowering therapy, any planned reduction in calorie
intake as well as the prevailing glycaemic control and pre-existing rate of
hypoglycaemia.138 (Level I) 139,140 (Level II-1) 136 (Level II-2)
› Patients with suboptimal diabetes control (HbA 1c >7%) and known postprandial hyperglycaemia without documented hypoglycaemia may not
require any insulin dose reduction when commencing moderate-intensity
exercise with usual diabetic diet.140 (Level II-1) 136 (Level II-2)
› When combining initiation of exercise with reduction in calorie intake for
weight-loss, there is a greater risk of hypoglycaemia. Reduction in glucoselowering therapy with insulin, SUs and glinides should be considered
depending on the baseline glucose profile. In T2DM patients with preexisting symptomatic hypoglycaemia, reduction of such treatments by
50% or more should be considered prior to initiation of combination
exercise and diet intervention.138 (Level I)
› When there is concern about possibility of hypoglycaemia (patients with
near-normal postprandial plasma glucose readings), reduction of bolus
insulin of up to 50% (depending on exercise intensity) without adverse
hyperglycaemia and exercise can also be performed in the postprandial
state.139 (Level II-1)
› Exercise performed in the fasting state may have greater impact on
subsequent postprandial glucose reduction compared to exercise
performed in the postprandial state.141 (Level II-2)
› Elevated fasting plasma glucose in T2DM patients with dawn phenomenon,
may be reduced by performing early morning exercise in the fasting state
(prebreakfast).142 (Level II-2)
› There is inadequate evidence to guide the need for glucose monitoring
during exercise in T2DM patients. It is suggested that patients at high
risk of hypoglycaemia (e.g. well-controlled diabetes on insulin therapy
with calorie reduction) engaging in prolonged exercise (more than 3045 minutes) should perform plasma glucose monitoring. This is based on
experience with T1DM patients. (Level III)
• Hyperglycaemia is not a contraindication for exercise in people with T2DM
provided they feel well (no symptoms of dehydration such as excessive
thirst, nausea or fatigue).143 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations: Physical activity
1. In older patients, previously sedentary, long-standing
T2DM, patients with multiple risk factors, and patients
with previous evidence of atherosclerotic disease
should be considered for pre-exercise assessment.
Grade C
2. The duration of exercise should be at least 150
minutes/week of moderate-intensity and/or at least
75 minutes/week of vigorous aerobic and at least two
sessions per week of resistance exercise.
Grade A
3. Higher duration of exercise (300 minutes/week of
moderate-intensity) is advisable for greater benefit in
glycaemic control and cardiovascular risk reduction.
Grade B
4. Glucose lowering drugs may need adjustment if
exercise is planned. Insulin-treated patients engaging
in moderate/high-intensity exercise may require
counselling and modification of insulin doses.
Grade C
3.5.3 Tobacco cessation
• Smoking of tobacco and tobacco products (cigarette, electronic cigarette/
vape, shisha, pipe, cigar etc.) can lead to various complications of chronic
non-communicable diseases (NCD) such as coronary heart disease, cancers,
and chronic lung disease. It is the main cause of death worldwide whereby 8
million people die every year as a consequence of this habit.957
• Hence, the decision to integrate smoking treatment with NCDs is important
to reduce the prevalence of NCDs and their complications. This decision
was made during the World Health Organization Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) Steering Committee Meeting in December
2019 chaired by the Honourable Health Minister of Malaysia.
• The treatment for smoking should be initiated by the treating doctor based
on the assessment and treatment of tobacco use disorder as in Appendix 12–
Assessment and Treatment of Tobacco Use Disorder. More details on this can
be found in the CPG on Treatment of Tobacco Use Disorder 2016, available at:
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/Penerbitan/CPG/Respiratory/CPG_
TobacoDisorder.pdf
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.6.1 Oral glucose lowering drugs (OGLDs)
Biguanides (Metformin)
• Metformin lowers blood glucose especially fasting plasma glucose by
decreasing hepatic glucose production. It does not stimulate insulin secretion
and as monotherapy, is usually not accompanied by hypoglycaemia.
• Metformin reduces HbA1c by up to 1.5%.144 (Level I)
• Use in combination with other OGLDs has a synergistic effect to further
reduce plasma glucose and may reduce insulin requirement.145 (Level I)
• Most common adverse effects are nausea, anorexia and diarrhoea.
› These are minimised if metformin is taken together with/or after meals.
› To reduce GI side effects, it is best to start with a single daily dose, followed
by weekly titration.
› Extended release formulation also reduces these side effects.144 (Level I)
• Vitamin B12 deficiency is a recognised uncommon long-term complication.146 (Level II-2)
• Lactic acidosis is rare (<1 case per 100,000 treated patients) and usually
associated with renal impairment.147 (Level I)
• Metformin is weight neutral or may result in mild weight loss of up to 1.1 kg.148 (Level II-1)
• Current evidence shows that T2DM individuals who smoke have a higher risk
for cardiovascular morbidity and premature mortality and worse glycaemic
control compared with T2DM non-smokers.953 (Level II-3)
3.6 Medications
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Recent cardiovascular outcome trials (CVOTs) have confirmed CV
benefits beyond glucose lowering in 2 classes of GLDs i.e. GLP1-RA
and SGL T2-i. As a result, a new paradigm shift in choice of drug
therapy has emerged.
• Achieving HbA1c targets remains an important goal that may require
combining drugs that target the multiple pathophysiological defects.
• Recent evidence supports the use of early combination therapy for
durability of glycaemic control.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Doses beyond 2000 mg OD do not confer any further glycaemic benefit and
significantly increase GI side effects.145 (Level I)
• Low dose metformin can be safely prescribed to lactating mothers.149 (Level II-1) 150 (Level II-2)
Table 3-8: Metformin formulations and dosages.
Drugs Formulation (mg) Dose Maximum dose
Metformin 500 /1000 Initial dose:
500 mg OD
Usual: 1000 mg BD
*Exception: 1000 mg TDS
Metformin
SR 850 Usual dose:
850 mg BD 850 mg TDS
Metformin
XR 500/750/1000
Initial dose:
500 mg OD
Usual dose:
2000 mg OD
2000 mg OD
*Some patients may benefit up to a maximum dose of 1000 mg TDS.
For fixed-dose combination formulations, please refer to Table 3-16 and specific product inserts. Dose
escalation will depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
SR: slow release; XR: extended release; OD: daily; BD: twice daily; TDS: three times daily.
Sulphonylureas (SU)
• SUs reduce plasma glucose by increasing insulin secretion with an average
HbA1c reduction of 0.46%-1.62%.151 (Level I)
• The major adverse effect is hypoglycaemia. 151,152 (Level I) The risk is higher in
renal impairment, liver cirrhosis and the elderly.153 (Level II-2)
• Weight gain in the range of 1.31 kg-3.32 kg is common.151,152 (Level I)
• Among the second generation SUs, gliclazide, glipizide and glimepiride are
preferred over other SUs as they cause less hypoglycaemia and less weight
gain.154,155 (Level I) 156 (Level III)
• Glibenclamide has been shown to be associated with significant risk of
hypoglycaemia and WHO recommends against its use in those above 60
years of age.157 (Level III)
• SUs are highly protein bound. Administration of drugs that can displace them
(e.g. NSAIDs, anti-thyroid drugs, sulpha drugs, anticoagulants and α-blockers)
can increase the risk of hypoglycaemia.158 (Level III)
• SUs should be taken 10-30 minutes before meals and can be combined with
other OGLDs to improve glucose control.158 (Level III)
• The TOSCA IT, a multicentre, pragmatic trial, over 5.7 years, found the incidence
of CV events was similar with SUs (predominantly glimepiride and gliclazide)
vs. pioglitazone as add on treatment to metformin; with the conclusion that
SUs and pioglitazone were equally safe with regard to CV risk.159 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• In the recent CVOT (CAROLINA trial) of adults with T2DM and elevated
CV risk, the head-to-head RCT comparing linagliptin (a DPP4-i) to SU
(glimepiride), resulted in a non-inferior risk of a composite CV outcome.
This study demonstrated non-inferior CV safety for linagliptin compared to
glimepiride. This has eliminated the stigma of elevated CV risk previously
associated with SUs.160 (Level I)
Table 3-9: SU formulations and dosage.
Drugs Formulations (mg) Minimum dose Maximum dose
Glibenclamide 5 2.5 mg OD 10 mg BD
Gliclazide
Gliclazide MR
60 /30
40 mg OM
30 mg OM
160 mg BD
120 mg OM
Glipizide 5 2.5 mg OM 10 mg BD
Glimepiride 2 /3 1 mg OM 6 mg OM
For fixed-dose combination formulations, please refer to specific product inserts. Dose escalation will
depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
MR: modified release; OD: daily; OM: morning; BD: twice daily.
Note:
Glibenclamide is metabolised by the liver but its metabolites are active and excreted by the kidney. It is
contraindicated in renal impairment. Other second-generation SUs (glimepiride, gliclazide and glipizide)
may still be used in renal impairment with caution.
Refer to Appendix 7 for dose adjustment in renal impairment
Meglitinides
• These are short acting insulin secretagogues that bind to different sites
within the SU receptor. It has a shorter half-life than SUs.161 (Level I)
• It should be taken within 10 minutes before main meals.
• It is primarily used to control PPG and reduces HbA1c by 1.0%-1.2%.161 (Level I)
• It can be added to other OGLDs except SU.
• It is associated with less risk of weight gain compared to SUs and hypoglycaemia
may be less frequent.148 (Level I)
Table 3-10: Meglitinide formulation and dosage.
Drugs Formulations (mg) Minimum dose Maximum dose
Repaglinide 0.5/1/2 0.5 mg with
main meals
4 mg with
main meals
(not exceeding
16 mg daily)
Dose escalation will depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
Caution:
There is a higher risk of prolonged hypoglycaemia when repaglinide is combined with gemfibrozil.162 (Level I)
This combination is contraindicated.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors (AGIs)
• AGIs e.g. acarbose reduces the rate of absorption of polysaccharides in the
proximal small intestine by inhibiting α-glucosidase enzymes. They should be
taken with main meals.163 (Level I)
• It lowers PPG without causing hypoglycaemia and reduces HbA 1c by 0.5%0.8%.163 (Level I)
• AGI significantly reduced risk of incident T2DM from IGT by 23%, whereas in
those with IGT or T2DM, the impact on CV outcomes was neutral.164,165 (Level I)
• The common side effects are bloating, abdominal discomfort, diarrhoea and
flatulence.163,164 (Level I) 166 (Level II-1)
Table 3-11: AGI formulation and dosage.
Drugs Formulations (mg) Minimum dose Maximum dose
Acarbose 50/100
Initial dose:
50 mg OD
Usual dose:
50-100 mg
taken at 1st bite of
main meals
100 mg TDS
Dose escalation will depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
OD: daily; TDS: three times daily.
Thiazolidinediones (TZD)
• TZDs are peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-γ)
agonists and act primarily by increasing insulin sensitivity in muscle, adipose
tissue and liver.
• TZDs reduce HbA1c by 0.5%-1.4%.167,168 (Level I)
• Improvement in glycaemic control may only be seen after six weeks with
maximum effect at six months.169 (Level I)
• Side effects include weight gain, fluid retention, heart failure, macular
oedema and osteoporosis.167,168,170,171 (Level I)
• The majority of fractures associated with TZD use were in the distal upper or
lower limb, as opposed to the classic sites of osteoporotic fractures.172 (Level I)
• The use of lower dose may confer glycaemic efficacy while minimising risk of
side effects.173 (Level II-1)
• TZDs are contraindicated in patients with CCF170 (Level I) and liver failure.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-12: TZD formulations and dosage.
Drugs Formulations (mg) Minimum dose Maximum dose
Pioglitazone 15/30 15 mg OD 45 mg OD
Dose escalation will depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
Caution: when used in combination with insulin due to risk of aggravating fluid retention.(Level III)
OD: daily.
Incretins – Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor (DPP4-i) and glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) analogue
• The incretin system has become an important target in the treatment of
T2DM.
• After meals, incretins (GLP-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide [GIP]) 174 (Level II-2) are released; these augment glucose-induced
insulin secretion and suppress glucagon release thus reducing hepatic
glucose output, and reducing plasma glucose in a glucose dependent manner.
• Incretins, at pharmacological levels, reduce gastric motility (thus slowing
glucose absorption)175 (Level II-2) and increase satiety by acting on centres in the
brain.176 (Level II-1)
• The incretin effect is markedly decreased in T2DM, resulting in delayed and
reduced insulin release as well as lack of suppression of glucagon release
after a meal.177 (Level I)
• Agents that increase the effect of incretins have been proven to improve
glucose control. 2 classes of drugs have recently been developed: DPP4-i
(incretin enhancer) and GLP-1 analogue or GLP1-RA (incretin mimetic).178,179 (Level I)
A. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor (DPP4-i)
• DPP4-i lower HbA1c by 0.5%-0.8%.180-185 (Level I)
• They are weight neutral and have a minimal risk of hypoglycaemia.186-190 (Level I)
• DPP4-i CVOTs (CARMELINA, CAROLINA, TECOS, SAVOR-TIMI) 160,191-193 (Level I)
have confirmed CV safety [Refer to Appendix 8 DPP4-i CVOT table].
• They are efficacious and safe in the elderly and all stages of DKD (See
Appendix 7 for dose adjustment in renal failure).
• Saxagliptin is not recommended in patients with pre-existing heart failure 6
(Level III) as it has been shown to be associated with increased risk of hospital
admission for heart failure.193 (Level I)
• The VERIFY study has confirmed a delay in loss of glycaemic control when
combination therapy (metformin + vildagliptin) is initiated within 24 months
of diagnosis, as compared to sequential therapy.194 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-13: DPP4-i formulations and dosage.
Drugs Formulations (mg) Minimum dose Maximum dose
Sitagliptin 25/50/100 25 mg OD 100 mg OD
Vildagliptin 50 50 mg OD 50 mg BD
Saxagliptin 2.5/5 2.5 mg OD 5 mg OD
Linagliptin 5 5 mg OD 5 mg OD
For fixed dose combination formulations, please refer to specific product inserts. Dose escalation will
depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
OD: daily; BD: twice daily.
B. Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP1-RA) – will be discussed in
Injectable therapies.
• Currently, all available GLP1-RAs are in the form of injectables.
• However, oral semaglutide may be made available in the near future.
Sodium-glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGL T2-i)
• This class of drugs selectively inhibits SGL T2, a transporter in the proximal
tubule, thus reducing glucose reabsorption leading to an increase in urinary
glucose excretion.195-198 (Level I)
• It reduces HbA1c by 0.5%-1.0%.199 (Level I)
• Additional effects of treatment include weight loss (1.8 kg-2.7 kg) and
reduction of SBP (2.7-4.8 mmHg) and DBP (1.8-2.0 mmHg). 199 (Level I)
• It has a lower risk of hypoglycaemia, similar to placebo.200 (Level I)
• It can be combined with other OGLDs/GLP1-RA/insulin to improve glucose
control.(Level I)
• SGL T2-i (EMPA-REG and CANVAS)201,202 (Level I) have been shown to significantly
reduce MACE endpoints in T2DM with ASCVD [Refer to Appendix 8 SGL T2-i
CVOT table].
• SGL T2-i have been proven to reduce hospitalisation for heart failure as a
primary as well as secondary prevention (EMPA-REG, CANVAS and DECLARETIMI and VERTIS-CV).203-205,952 (Level I)
› In two dedicated heart failure studies; (DAPA-HF) 206 (Level I) and EMPERORReduced951 (Level I) that included patients with heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction (HFrEF), addition of SGL T2-i significantly reduced
hospitalisation for heart failure and CV death by 25% (HR 0.75, 95% CI: 0.680.84, p<0.0001) 950 vs. placebo. These studies included patients with and
without T2DM.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Efficacy of glucose lowering effects of SGL T2-i are dependent on renal
function and it is not recommended for glucose lowering, in patients with
moderate to severe renal impairment.207,208 (Level I)
› SGL T2-i reduce intraglomerular pressure independent of glucose levels.
› A reduction of eGFR of approximately 5 ml/min/1.73 m 2 may occur in the
first 1-3 months of starting an SGL T2-i.
› SGL T2-i have been shown to be effective in reducing renal endpoints
(reduction in macroalbuminuria, doubling of serum creatinine, ESKD and
renal death) down to eGFR of 30 ml/min/1.73 m2, in patients with DKD.209 (Level I)
› Do not initiate at eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73 m 2 but, may continue if already
initiated (see Section 5.2).
• Side effects of SGL T2-i include:
› significant increase in urogenital mycotic infection and UTI;202,207,210 (Level I)
› small but significant increase in risk of DKA, volume depletion 207,210 (Level I)
and osmotic diuresis;211 (Level I) and
› cases of euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis (eDKA) have been reported in
patients who were on SGL T2-i with inter-current illness (Refer to Section
4.3).211 (Level I) 212 (Level III)
• During inter-current illnesses/surgery, SGL T2-i may need to be withheld
temporarily.212 (Level III)
Table 3-14: SGLT2-i formulations and dosages.
Drugs Formulations (mg) Minimum dose Maximum dose
Dapagliflozin 5/10 5 mg OD 10 mg OD
Canagliflozin 100/300 100 mg OD 300 mg OD
Empagliflozin 10/25 10 mg OD 25 mg OD
Luseogliflozin 2.5/5 2.5 mg OD 5 mg OD
Ertugliflozin 5/15 5 mg OD 15 mg OD
For fixed dose combination formulations, please refer to Table 3-15. Dose escalation will depend on
tolerability and according to the PI.
OD: daily.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-15: SGLT2-i fixed dose formulations and dosages.
Drugs Formulation
Available dose
(mg)
Maximum
allowable dose
SGLT2-i + metformin
Dapagliflozin Dapagliflozin/
Metformin XR
5/500; 5/1000;
10/1000 10/2000 mg OD
Empagliflozin Empagliflozin/
Metformin
5/500; 5/1000;
12.5/500; 12.5/1000
25/2000 mg
divided dose
Ertugliflozin Ertugliflozin/
Metformin HCl
2.5/850; 2.5/1000;
7.5/850; 7.5/1000
15/2000 mg
divided dose
SGLT2-i + DPP4-i
Dapagliflozin Dapagliflozin/
Saxagliptin 10/5 10/5 mg OD
Empagliflozin Empagliflozin/
Linagliptin 10/5; 25/5 25/5 mg OD
Ertugliflozin Ertugliflozin/
Sitagliptin 5/100; 15/100 15/100 mg OD
Dose escalation will depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
OD: daily; XR: extended release; HCl: hydrochloride.
3.6.2 Injectable agents
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP1-RA)210,213,214
• GLP-1 RAs currently available include exenatide IR and ER (once weekly),
liraglutide (daily) and lixisenatide (daily) and, the once-weekly agents
dulaglutide and semaglutide.
• GLP-1RAs have been shown to reduce HbA 1C (~0.8-1.6%), body weight (~1.04.1 kg). Their effects are dose dependent. The weight reduction is due to the
effect on satiety and delay in gastric emptying.
• Common side effects of all GLP1-RAs are mainly gastro-intestinal i.e. nausea,
vomiting and diarrhoea.215 (Level I)
A. Exenatide
• Exenatide formulations available: immediate release (IR) and extended
release (ER) formulations. 208 (Level I) Exenatide ER is the more commonly used
preparation.
• Exenatide monotherapy results in a reduction of HbA1c by 1.53%, comparable
to metformin.216 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Exenatide ER,
› results in superior HbA 1c reduction, when compared to sitagliptin and
pioglitazone as add on to metformin.217 (Level I) vs. sitagliptin and pioglitazone
individually.217 (Level I)
› is significantly superior to basal insulin glargine as add on therapy to
maximum OGLDs.218 (Level I)
› can be added on to SGL T2-i (dapagliflozin) for further HbA1c reduction.219 (Level I)
› can be added on to existing basal insulin glargine therapy; with further HbA1c
reduction and significantly more patients reaching HbA1c <7.0%.220 (Level I)
• Progressive weight loss is seen with its use.221-223 (Level I)
• In the EXSCEL study where Exenatide ER was compared to placebo in a highrisk population, the occurrence of primary MACE endpoints (death from CV
causes, non-fatal MI or non-fatal stroke) did not significantly differ between
the two groups [Refer to Appendix 8 GLP1-RA CVOT table].224 (Level I)
B. Liraglutide
• Liraglutide is indicated for use in combination with OGLDs and/or insulin. It
results in reductions in mean HbA1c of 0.8%-1.4%225-228 (Level I)
• There is no increased risk of hypoglycaemia and it may result in weight loss
of up to 3.2 kg.229 (Level I)
• In patients who are on combination of metformin and SU with an HbA 1c
<10.0%, the addition of liraglutide produced similar glycaemic improvement
compared to insulin glargine without any increased risk of hypoglycaemia
and weight gain.225 (Level I)
• In the LEADER study, MACE endpoints were significantly reduced in the
liraglutide group vs. placebo [Refer to Appendix 8 GLP1-RA CVOT table].230 (Level I)
C. Lixisenatide
• Lixisenatide can be used in combination with OGLDs and/or basal insulin.231,232 (Level I)
• Monotherapy with lixisenatide results in a HbA1c reduction of 0.5%-0.7%.231,232
(Level I)
• In Malaysia, lixisenatide is available as a fixed-ratio combination iGlarLixi
which combines basal insulin glargine with prandial GLP-1RA lixisenatide.
› Once daily iGlarLixi was superior to iGlar monotherapy when used with
metformin with or without a second OGLD and in patients inadequately
controlled on basal insulin with or without OGLDs, with superior weight
reduction.233-235 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
› Switching to iGlarLixi is superior to continuing maximally tolerated GLP-1
RA. Significantly more iGlarLixi patients achieve HbA 1c <7% compared to
remaining on GLP1-RA alone.236,237 (Level I)
• Lixisenatide given to a very high-risk population with MI or hospitalisation
for unstable angina and followed up for a mean of 25 months showed no
significant difference in any components of the composite MACE endpoints
[Refer to Appendix 8 GLP1-RA CVOT table].238 (Level I)
• Refer to package insert for dosing schedule.
D. Dulaglutide
• Dulaglutide is a long acting once weekly GLP1-RA.
• Dulaglutide:
› monotherapy was slightly superior to metformin.239 (Level I)
› as add-on to metformin, is superior to sitagliptin.240,241 (Level I)
› can be combined with glimepiride for further significant HbA1c reduction. 242
(Level I)
› can be added on to a SGLT2-i for further reduction in HbA1c on a background
of with or without metformin.243 (Level I)
• In comparison to other GLP1-RAs, dulaglutide showed:
› similar efficacy in comparison to daily liraglutide. However, liraglutide
demonstrated greater weight loss (3.6 kg vs. 2.9 kg).244 (Level I)
› was significantly superior to exenatide BD with better HbA 1c reduction
when added to OGLDs.245 (Level I)
• As add-on to insulin, addition of dulaglutide:
› on a background of basal insulin glargine, resulted in significant further
HbA1c reduction;246 (Level I) and
› on a background of prandial insulin, was superior to basal insulin glargine,
with significantly greater HbA1c reduction and a weight difference of 3.2 kg
between groups.247 (Level I)
• In the REWIND study (over 5 years), which consisted predominantly of patients
with CVD risk factors (70%), and established CVD (30%), dulaglutide was
associated with a significant reduction of primary 3-point MACE endpoints
[Refer to Appendix 8 GLP1-RA CVOT table]. 248 (Level I)
E. Semaglutide
• Semaglutide is a once-weekly injectable human GLP-1RA (0.5 mg, 1 mg).
• It has a dose dependent effect on HbA1c and weight reduction.249 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Semaglutide in both doses demonstrated superior glycaemic efficacy
compared to:
› placebo in drug naïve patients.250 (Level I)
› sitagliptin on a background of metformin + TZD.251 (Level I)
› canagliflozin on a background of metformin.252 (Level I)
• Semaglutide can be effectively added on to SGL T2-i + existing OGLDs for
further HbA1c reduction.253 (Level I)
• Semaglutide is the most potent GLP1-RA with demonstrated superior
glycaemic efficacy to exenatide ER, 254 (Level I) dulaglutide 255 (Level I) and
liraglutide.256 (Level I)
• Semaglutide (both doses) has demonstrated superior glycaemic efficacy
vs. basal insulin glargine, when added on to insulin naïve patients 257 (Level I) or
already on basal insulin glargine.258 (Level I)
• In the CVOT (SUSTAIN 6) over 104 weeks, semaglutide was associated with a
significant reduction in risk of 3-point MACE [Refer to Appendix 8 GLP1-RA
CVOT table].259 (Level I)
• Patients with a history of diabetic retinopathy should be monitored for
progression of retinopathy and slower dose titration may be warranted 260
(Level I) (Refer to Section 5.1).
Table 3-16: Summary of dosage, titration requirements, administration and
actions in the event of a missed dose for GLP1-RA.
Drug Titration
Initial
dose
Recommended
dose
Administration
in relation to
meals
Action if
missed dose
Once daily
Exenatide Yes
5 μg
BD
for at
least 1
month
5-10 μg BD
Should be
administered
within 60 min
before main
meals
Continue
with the next
scheduled
dose
Liraglutide Yes
0.6 mg
OD for
at least
1 week
1.2-1.8 mg OD
Any time
without regard
to meals
≤12 hrs:
administer
the dose
as soon as
possible
>12 hrs: skip
the dose
Lixisenatide Yes
10 μg
OD
for 14
days
20 μg OD
Should be
administered
within 60 min
before any
meal
Administer
the dose
within 1 hr
before the
next meal
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Once weekly
Exenatide No N/A 2 mg once
weekly
At any time
without regard
to meals
Administer
the next
dose as soon
as practical.
Only one
injection
should be
administered
in a 24-hr
period
Dulaglutide No N/A
Monotherapy:
0.75 mg once
weekly
Add-on
therapy: 1.5 mg
once weekly
At any time,
without regard
to meals
≥3 days until
the next
scheduled
dose:
administer
the dose
as soon as
possible
<3 days: skip
the dose,
wait and
administer
their next
regularly
scheduled
weekly dose
Semaglutide Yes
0.25
mg
once
weekly
for 4
weeks
0.5-1.0 mg
once weekly
(dose increase
after 4 weeks if
required)
At any time,
without regard
to meals
≥5 days until
the next
scheduled
dose:
administer
the dose
as soon as
possible
<5 days: skip
the dose,
wait and
administer
their next
regularly
scheduled
weekly dose
Dose escalation will depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
For CV benefit refer to Appendix 8 GLP1-RA CVOT table.
μg: microgram; OD: daily; hr: hour.
Adapted from Romera I et al. Diab Ther 2018.261
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Precautions for GLP1-RA
• They are not a substitute for insulin.
• Nausea and vomiting are common side effects and patients need to
be adequately counselled.
• GLP1-RAs should not be combined with DPP4-i, as they both belong
to the same class of incretins.
• They should not be used in patients with a history of pancreatitis.
• Should not be used in patients with a history of or a family history of
MEN 2A or 2B or medullary thyroid cancer. 262 (Level II-1)
• Exenatide and Lixisenatide should not be used in patients with
gastroparesis.
• Refer to specific product inserts and Appendix 7 when treating
patients with DKD.
Note:
When considering initiating GLP-1RA for CV risk reduction, we recommend choosing GLP-1RAs with
proven CVD benefit6 (Level III) and has received label indication for CV benefit from NPRA.
For fixed ratio combination formulations, please refer to specific product inserts.
Table 3-17: GLP1-RA formulations and dosage.
Drugs Formulations Minimum dose Maximum dose
Exenatide IR 5 μg/20 μL;
10 μg/40 μL 5 μg BD 10 μg BD
Exenatide ER 2 mg 2 mg weekly 2 mg weekly
Dulaglutide 0.75 mg/1.5 mg 0.75 mg weekly 1.5 mg weekly
Liraglutide 6 mg/mL 0.6 mg OD 1.8 mg OD
Lixisenatide 50 μg/mL; 100 μg/mL 10 μg OD 20 μg OD
Semaglutide 0.25 mg/0.5 mg 0.25 mg weekly 1.0 mg weekly
For fixed ratio formulations, please refer to specific product inserts. Dose escalation will depend on
tolerability and according to the PI.
IR: immediate release; XR: extended release; μg: microgram; μL: microlitre; BD: twice daily; OD: daily.
3.6.3 General guidelines for use of oral glucose lowering drugs
• OGLDs can be used as monotherapy or in combination with other OGLDs,
and/or injectable agents (e.g. insulin, GLP-RAs).
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Early combination therapy that addresses different pathophysiological
defects in T2DM should be considered in the newly diagnosed T2DM
patient.194,263 (Level I)
› The VERIFY study has confirmed a delay in loss of glycaemic control when
combination therapy (metformin + vildagliptin) is initiated within 24
months of diagnosis.194 (Level I)
› Though these results have not been generalised to other OGLDs, it
indicates the potential benefits of early combination therapy.
• Agents that are known to improve fasting hyperglycaemia include metformin
and TZDs while others reduce mainly postprandial hyperglycaemia.
› As first-line therapy, metformin is the preferred choice. 264 (Level I) Other
OGLDs are acceptable alternatives if metformin is not tolerated or
contraindicated.
• If glycaemic targets are not achieved despite compliance, intensification of
treatment should be made without delay.6 (Level III)
› Barriers to medication taking should be addressed in patients with poor
compliance.6 (Level III)
› The medication regimen should be re-evaluated at regular intervals (3-6
months) and adjusted as needed to incorporate new patient factors such as:
- ASCVD,
- heart failure,
- DKD,
- hypoglycaemia event,
- weight gain,
- cost concern; and
- change in socio-economic support.
• If monotherapy fails, combination of other agents is recommended.265 (Level III)
• Compliance may be improved with daily dosing or fixed-dose combination
(FDC) OGLDs.
• OGLDs are usually not the first-line therapy in stress hyperglycaemia. Insulin
therapy is recommended.
• Targets for control should be individualised.
• There may be a role for de-escalation of OGLD doses/medication. Reasons for
this include improvement in glycaemic control, successful weight loss (from
lifestyle intervention), change in glycaemic goals (especially in the setting
of elderly patients), development of new co-morbidities, development of
intolerable side effects, or treatment ineffectiveness.6 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.6.4 Combination of OGLDs, GLP-1RA and insulin
• If targets have not been reached after optimal OGLD therapy, consider
adding:
› pre-bed basal insulin,266-270 (Level I)
› pre-dinner premixed insulin;271,272 (Level I) or
› GLP-1RA, as an alternative to intermediate or long-acting insulin with less
incidence of hypoglycaemia and weight gain.218,257 (Level I)
• Combining insulin with the following OGLDs/injectable agent has been
shown to be effective:
› Biguanide (metformin),269,273,274 (Level I)
› Insulin secretagogue (SU),275 (Level I)
› AGIs, 163,276 (Level I)
› DPP4-i, 277-279 (Level I)
› SGL T2-i,195-198 (Level I)
› GLP1-RA, 210,229,232 (Level I)
› Insulin sensitizer (TZD) 280 (Level I) – (combination of TZD and insulin is not
generally recommended because of increased risk of fluid retention and
congestive cardiac failure (CCF).
• Basal insulin dose should be increased until target FPG is achieved safely.
› If HbA1c targets are not achieved despite normal FPG, then PPG should be
monitored.
› If HbA1c target is not achieved, further insulin intensification is required.
• In patients who are on insulin, metformin should be continued unless it is not
tolerated or contraindicated.
• Even though glycaemic targets are important shared objectives (patient
and HCP) due diligence should be given to progressive weight gain and
exacerbation of insulin resistance (IR) especially those patients who are
overweight and obese at start of therapy.
• Caution needs to be exercised when intensifying insulin dose/regimen with
attention to weight gain and unrecognised hypoglycaemia.281 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations: Combination of glucose lowering drugs
1. OGLDs can be used as monotherapy or in combination
with other OGLDs, and/or injectable agents (e.g. insulin,
GLP-1RA). Early combination therapy that addresses
different pathophysiological defects in T2DM may be
considered in recently diagnosed patients.
Grade A
2. As first line therapy, metformin is the preferred
choice. Other OGLDs are acceptable alternatives, if
metformin is not tolerated or contra-indicated.
Grade A
4. Cost of medications is a barrier and should be given
due consideration when choosing treatment options. Grade C
5. If targets are not met after optimal combined OGLDs
therapy, consider adding GLP-1RA or insulin. Grade A
6. HbA 1c remains an important target. If glycaemic
targets are not achieved, intensification of treatment
should be made every 3-6 months.
Grade C
3. Medication regimen choice should address:
a. co-morbidities such as ASCVD, heart failure and
CKD; and
b. risk for specific adverse drug effects, safety, and
tolerability.
Grade A
Grade C
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.6.5 Initiation, optimisation and intensification of insulin therapy
Adapted from Malaysian CPG on Insulin therapy in T2DM.282 (Level III)
• T2DM is a progressive disease characterised by worsening glycaemia due to
progressive decline in beta cell function.283 (Level I)
• This ultimately renders OGLDs ineffective and the majority of patients with
T2DM will require insulin therapy.
› Persistent hyperglycaemia in spite of optimal OGLDs and weight loss
suggests beta cell failure.
› However, it is important to exclude concomitant illnesses such as; chronic
infections, malignancy, or medications as a cause of the weight loss.
• Insulin therapy is suitable at all stages of T2DM, for all ages, and with a wide
range of treatment options and regimens. Insulin can be combined with
OGLDs or GLP-1RA.
• Insulin therapy should be considered in the following situations:
› inadequate glycaemic control on optimal dose and number of OGLDs284 (Level I)
(Refer to Figure 3-2).
› as short-term use in the following;
- acute illness or surgery,
- pregnancy,
- breast-feeding,
- severe metabolic decompensation (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis, hyperosmolar
hyperglycaemic state).
› as initial therapy in newly diagnosed T2DM,
- in presence of symptomatic hyperglycaemia and evidence of ongoing
catabolism,6 (Level III)
- when HbA1c >10% or FPG >13.0 mmol/L;6 (Level III) or
- as part of early insulinisation treatment regime.285 (Level I) 286 (Level II-2)
Insulin types and regimens
A. Insulin types
• The insulin currently used in this country are human insulin or insulin
analogue. Both types of insulin are further divided into prandial, basal and
premixed according to their pharmacokinetic profiles.
› Prandial insulin is administered pre-meal because of its short or rapid
onset of action in controlling postprandial glucose excursion. It is also used
in insulin pumps.
› Basal insulin is administered once or twice daily. The intermediate or longacting pharmacokinetic profile covers the basal insulin requirements in
between meals and through the night.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
› Premixed insulin is biphasic insulin that incorporates both the short
or rapid-acting insulin with intermediate-acting insulin into a single
preparation to cover for both postprandial glucose excursion as well as
basal insulin needs.
› Co-formulation insulin is a combination of a rapid acting and basal insulin
existing separately in one formulation. The basal and prandial components
do not interact, and their distinct pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
profile are not compromised.
Table 3-18: Types of insulin and their pharmacokinetic profiles.
Insulin
preparation
Onset of
action
Peak
action
(hours)
Duration of
action (hours)
Timing of
administration of
insulin
Prandial
Short acting,
Regular
Actrapid
Insugen R
30-60 min 2-4 6-10 30 min before meal
Rapid-acting
Analogue
Aspart
(Novorapid)
Lispro (Humalog)
Glulisine (Apidra)
0-20 min 1-3 3-5 5-15 min before or
immediately after
meals
Basal
Intermediateacting, NPH
Insulatard
Insugen N
1-2 hour 4-8 8-12 Pre-breakfast/
Pre-bed
Long Acting
Analogue
Glargine U100
(Lantus, Basalog)
30-60 min Less peak 16-24 Same time everyday
Glargine U300
(Toujeo)
Up to 6 hrs Less peak 24-36 Once daily at
any time of day,
preferably at the
same time within
3 hrs before/after
usual time.
Detemir (Levemir) 30-60 min Less peak 16-24 Same time everyday
Degludec
(Tresiba)
30-90 min Less peak 24-40 Flexible once daily
injection (maximum
interval up to 40 hrs)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Premixed insulins
Mixtard 30 30 min dual 18-23 30-60 min before
mealsInsugen 30/70 30 min dual 18-23
Novomix 30 10-20 min 1-4 18-23 5-15 min before
mealsHumalog mix
25/75
15 min 0.5-2.5 16-18
Humalog mix
50/50
15 min 0.5-2.5 16-18
Co-formulation
IDegAsp 30
[Ryzodeg]
Rapid-acting
insulin analogue +
basal insulin
10-20 min 1-4 24-40 5-15 min before
meals
• The time course of action of different insulin preparations may vary in
different individuals, or at different times in the same individual.
› The variations and time periods indicated in Table 3-18 should be
considered as general guidelines only.
› The higher the dose of the insulin, the longer the duration of action.
• Long acting insulin analogues, which have less peak, result in lower
hypoglycaemic episodes and less weight gain compared to human basal
insulin.267 (Level I)
• Glargine U300 compared to Glargine U100 is non-inferior in achieving
glycaemic control but with less overall and nocturnal hypoglycaemia.287-291 (Level I)
› The dose of Glargine U300 needed is generally 10%-17% higher compared
to Glargine U100.287-290 (Level I)
• Premix/co-formulation insulins can be used to reduce the number of
injections needed.
› Co-formulation insulin analogues (insulin degludec/insulin aspart) compared
to premixed biphasic insulin aspart is non-inferior in HbA 1C reduction
but with lower FPG and lower rate of confirmed nocturnal or overall
hypoglycaemia.292-294 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
B. Insulin regimen
• An ideal insulin regimen should mimic the physiological insulin response to
meals and endogenous hepatic glucose production.
• The choice of insulin regimen should be individualised, based on the patient’s
glycaemic profile, dietary pattern and lifestyle.
• The main advantage of insulin over other GLDs is that insulin lowers glucose
in a dose-dependent manner to almost any glycaemic target. The main
limitation of insulin is hypoglycaemia.
Initiation
• Insulin initiation can be done safely in an outpatient setting.
• Option for initiation include:
› basal insulin.287-290 (Level I)
- can be initiated at 10U a day or 0.1-0.2 U/kg/day,
- set FPG target and choose evidence-based titration algorithm e.g.
increase by 2 U every 3 days to reach target FPG without hypoglycaemia;
or
- Adjust 2 U every week based on 3 days’ glucose readings.
› Premixed insulin once or twice daily.
• All patients prescribed insulin therapy should be advised to perform selfmonitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) and empowered to self-adjust their
insulin doses (Refer to Section 3.8).
› Patients should be educated regarding symptoms of hypoglycaemia and
its management.
› Insulin dose optimisation requires gradual, safe and prompt titration
according to SMBG.295 (Level I)
Intensification
• After titration of basal insulin, if the HbA 1C is not at target but FPG is at
target, intensification of insulin therapy, by adding prandial insulin or
converting to premixed insulin is needed.
› Meta-analyses of trials comparing rapid acting insulin and human regular
insulin in patients with T2DM have not reported important differences in
HbA1C or hypoglycaemia.296,297 (Level I)
› Insulin regimen intensification can be twice, thrice or four times (basal
bolus) daily.
› Insulin pump may be considered in patients who are still not controlled
while on basal-bolus regime.298 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Barriers to insulin therapy
• There are numerous barriers to effective insulin therapy. These include
patients and healthcare providers’ factors e.g. non-adherence to insulin
(missing/skipping doses), inappropriate reduction of insulin dose, wrong
time of injections as well as fear of hypoglycaemia.
• The biggest barrier is adherence, and this should be adequately ascertained
prior to any effort to intensify insulin therapy.299 (Level II-3)
Table 3-19: Various insulin regimen options.
No. of
injections/
day Insulin regimen Type of insulin and timing
Basal Intermediate acting (NPH) insulin pre-bed
Basal Long-acting analogue once daily
Premixed OD Premixed/premixed analogue pre-dinner
Co-formulations Pre largest meal of the day
Basal Intermediate acting (NPH) pre-breakfast and
pre-dinner
Premixed BD Premixed insulin pre-breakfast and pre-dinner
Basal + 1 Basal insulin OD + 1 prandial insulin
Co-formulation
OD + 1
1 co-formulation insulin pre main meal
+ 1 Prandial insulin pre-2nd main meal (no data in
T2DM, data as in T1DM)
Co-formulation BD Co-formulation insulin pre 2 main meals
Basal + 2 Basal insulin OD + 2 prandial insulin
Prandial Prandial insulin pre-breakfast, pre-lunch and
pre-dinner
Premixed TDS Premixed pre-breakfast, pre-lunch and
pre-dinner
Premixed BD + 1 Premixed insulin pre-breakfast and pre-dinner
+ 1 prandial insulin pre-lunch
Premixed OD + 2 Prandial insulin pre-breakfast and pre-lunch
+ 1 premixed insulin pre-dinner
4 Basal bolus 1 Basal insulin OD + prandial insulin pre-breakfast,
pre-lunch and pre-dinner
5 Basal bolus 2
Intermediate acting (NPH) insulin pre-breakfast
and pre-bed + prandial insulin pre-breakfast,
pre-lunch and pre-dinner
Table above describes variations of insulin regimens available depending on the number of injections/day
and type of insulin with the timing.
OD: once daily; BD: twice daily; TDS: three times daily; NPH: Neutral Protamine Hagedorn; T1DM: type 1
diabetes mellitus.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Add basal insulin 10 U OD OR
0.1-0.2 U/kg/day
• TITRATE based on FPG
• Choose evidence based titration
algorithm
• If hypoglycaemia, reduce dose by
10-20%
• Premixed insulin OD/coformulation OD at main meal
If HbA1c above target
despite adequate titration
OR basal dose >0.5 U/kg
OR FPG at target
Basal plus:
• Add prandial insulin 4 U/
meal OR 10% of basal dose
• TITRATE prandial insulin by
increasing 1-2 U OR 10-15%
every 3 days
• If hypoglycaemia, reduce
prandial insulin by 10-20%
• Stepwise addition of
prandial insulin
If FPG at target but
glucose high during
the day, consider basal
insulin analogue
• Premixed insulin
BD
• TITRATE based on
individual need
• Premixed analogue
insulin TDS
• Basal bolus regimen
• Co-formulation BD
• TITRATE based on
individual need
Not adequately controlled on maximum OGLDs ± GLP1-RA
Pattern of hyperglycaemia
FPG + PPG
Newly diagnosed T2DM
• Symptomatic hyperglycaemia
regardless of HbA1c or FPG
• HbA 1c >10% or FPG >13.0 mmol/L
• T2DM on maximal OGLDS with HbA1c
>7% or, > individualised target
Figure 3-2: Initiation and optimisation of insulin therapy.
T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus; FPG: fasting plasma glucose; PPG: post-prandial glucose; OGLDs: oral
glucose lowering drugs; GLP1-RA: Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; U: units; OD: daily; BD: twice
daily; TDS: thrice daily.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
General guidelines for long term use of insulin
• The basal intermediate acting insulin should be administered pre-bed
(preferably not earlier than 10 p.m.) because of the risk of hypoglycaemia in
the early hours of the morning if given earlier.
• It is not necessary to have an extra meal or snack after intermediate or long
acting insulin.
• Requirements of high dose of insulin (total daily dose >1.5 U/kg-2.0 U/kg)
should prompt a search for an underlying cause/secondary problem such as:
› non-adherence,
› incorrect dosing, timing and injection technique (Available at Forum for
injection technique guidelines, Malaysia at http://mems.my/forum-forinjection-technique-malasyia-fit-my/); and
› occult infections.
• In general, total daily dose of prandial insulin should not be >50% of total
daily dose.
• Patients should be encouraged to rotate their injection sites in the abdomen.
• Insulin therapy may cause weight gain through improved conservation of
ingested calories, defensive eating from fear of hypoglycaemia or change in
appetite regulation centrally.281 (Level I)
› This effect is exaggerated if “unphysiological” dose of insulin is used.
› Monitor weight – progressive weight gain should raise the possibility of
too much insulinisation. Weight gain can be minimised by improving insulin
sensitivity through diet, lifestyle measures or using insulin sensitizing
OGLDs and, hence avoiding need for large doses of insulin.
3.6.6 Biosimilar insulin
• Pharmaceutical companies other than the original multi-national ones also
manufacture market-similar insulins.
• Because none of the insulin manufacturing processes are identical, this
results in insulin that might become biosimilarly different from the originator
insulin to a certain extent.300
• The National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency (NPRA) guidelines for
market approval require that the manufacturer demonstrate that the insulin
has a safety and efficacy profile that is similar to that of the original insulin
formulation.
• Examples of available biosimilar insulins in Malaysia are Insugen-R, Insugen-N,
Insugen-30/70, and Basalog (Glargine).
• Local post-marketing clinical studies have confirmed non-inferiority in
efficacy and safety vs. original.301
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations: Insulin initiation, optimisation and
intensification
1. The choice of insulin regimen should be individualised,
based on the patient’s glycaemic profile, dietary
pattern and lifestyle.
Grade C
2. OGLDs may be continued. SU may need to be
reduced/stopped when intensifying insulin. Grade A
3. The biggest barrier is adherence, and this should
be adequately ascertained prior to any effort to
intensify insulin therapy.
Grade C
4. Intensification of insulin therapy (i.e. increasing
number of injections) should be considered if
glycaemic targets are not met.
Grade A
5. Attention to weight gain, assessment for hunger/
defensive-eating behaviour and recognition of
possibility of over-insulinisation is important.
Lifestyle and dietary modification need to be
emphasized at every stage of T2DM management.
Grade C
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Diagnosis of T2DM
Lifestyle modificationa
HbA1c <6.5%
AND
FPG <6.0 mmol/L
Consider
metformin
monotherapyb
If post prandial
is >11.0 mmol/L
and/or
metformin is
not tolerated,
consider one of
the following:
Meglitinide
AGI
DPP4-i
• Follow-up with
HbA1c after 3-6
months
• If HbA1c ≤6.5%,
continue
with lifestyle
modification.
• If HbA1c >6.5%c
HbA1c 6.5-7.4%
OR
FPG 6.0-7.9
mmol/L
Mono- or dualtherapyc with
Metformind OR
SU
DPP4-i
GLP1-RA
SGL T2-i
• Optimise dose
of GLD agent in
subsequent 3-6
months.
• Follow-up with
HbA1c after 3-6
months
• If HbA1c ≤6.5%,
continue
therapy
HbA1c 7.5-8.4%
OR
FPG 8.0-9.9
mmol/L
Dual
combination
therapye with
any combination
of:
Metformin
SU
Meglitinide
AGI
TZD
DPP4-i
GLP1-RA
SGL T2-i
Insulin
• Optimise dose
of GLD agent
in subsequent
3-6 months.
• Follow-up with
HbA1c after 3-6
months
• If HbA1c ≤6.5%,
continue
therapy
HbA1c 8.5-10.0%
OR
FPG 10.0-13.0
mmol/L
Triple
combination
therapye with
any combination
of:
Metformin
SU
Meglitinide
AGI
TZD
DPP4-i
GLP1-RA
SGL T2-i
Insulin
• Optimise dose
of GLD agent
in subsequent
3-6 months.
• Follow-up with
HbA1c after 3-6
months
• If HbA1c ≤6.5%,
continue
therapy
HbA1c >10.0%
OR
FPG >13.0
mmol/Lf
Basal/premixed
insulin therapy
+
Combination
therapy
OR
Intensive insulin
therapy
+
OGLD
Efficacious, low risk
of hypoglycaemia
and weight neutral
Efficacious, risk of
hypoglycaemia and
weight gain
Efficacious, low risk
of hypoglycaemia
and weight loss
Moderate efficacy,
low risk of
hypoglycaemia
and weight neutral
Moderate efficacy,
low risk of
hypoglycaemia and
weight gain
Moderate efficacy,
low risk of
hypoglycaemia
and weight loss
Modest efficacy,
low risk of
hypoglycaemia and
weight neutral
3.7 Treatment algorithms for the management of T2DM
Figure 3-3: Treatment algorithm for newly diagnosed T2DM
a. Lifestyle modification: refer to Sections 3.5.1 and 3.5.3. b. If patients are able to normalise plasma
glucose (glucose profile/HbA 1c) and/or lose weight, may continue metformin. c. Consider addition
of DPP4-i (vildagliptin) – In the VERIFY trial metformin + vildagliptin delays loss of glycaemic control
when initiated within 24 months of diagnosis.194 (Level I) d. Meglitinide/AGI/TZD may not be appropriate for
monotherapy. e. Combination therapy includes both oral and injectable (GLP1-RA) GLD. f. For patients
who are symptomatic refer to Section 3.6.5.
FPG: fasting plasma glucose; AGI: alpha-glucosidase inhibitors; DPP4-i: dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors;
SGL T2-i: sodium-glucose cotransporter 2-inhibitors; SU: sulphonylurea; GLP1-RA: glucagon-like peptide-1
receptor agonist; TZD: thiazolidinediones; GLD: glucose lowering drugs; OGLD: oral glucose lowering drugs.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 3-4: Treatment recommendations for patients with T2DM on clinic follow-up.
* Maximum OGLDs allowed is 5. ∫ When on insulin continue metformin/SGL T2-i/DPP4-i/GLP1-RA. Stop SU if on full insulin. f Lifestyle modification: refer to Sections 3.5.1
and 3.5.3. ** for GLDs – interval before addition of another GLD may need to allow for dose titration and escalation of the current therapy. DPP4-i: dipeptidyl peptidase-4
inhibitors; SGL T2-i: sodium-glucose cotransporter 2-inhibitors; SU: sulphonylurea; GLP1-RA: glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; GLD: glucose lowering drugs.
3-6 months after initiation of therapy
HbA1c above individualised target with lifestyle modification
+ existing therapy
Lifestyle modification
must be maintained at
every juncture of T2DM
treatment. It should
include strategies to
lose weight, correct diet
and incorporate physical
activities.f
0.5%-1% above target
Reassess HbA1c after 3-6 months**
1%-2% above target >2% above target
Add 1 additional GLD from
different class
OR
Intensification of insulin (if
already on insulin)∫
Consider 2 GLDs from
different classes*
OR
Intensification of insulin (if
already on insulin)∫
Initiation of insulin ±
GLP1-RA∫
OR
Intensification of insulin∫
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
If HbA1c not to individualised target
Note: Reaching HbA1c is the priority (Targets individualised). Cost of newer medications may render them inaccessible.
Use therapies that have been shown to be efficacious and safe.
LIFESTYLE MODIFICATION + METFORMIN
(unless intolerant or contraindicated / ½ dose at DKD stage 3, stop at DKD stages 4-5)
Overweight /obese
DPP4-i SGLT2-iGLP1-RAx SGLT2-i / GLP1-RAWeight loss through
lifestyle modification^
DPP4-i OR SU* SGLT2-i
(stop when initiating dialysis)
SGLT2-i GLP1-RASGLT2-i GLP1-RA
(if SGLT2-i given or vice-versa) GLP1-RA/SGLT2-i SU*
(if DPP4-i given) GLP1-RA∫
(contraindicated at
eGFR <15 ml/min/1.73m
2 )TZD DPP4-iƒ (if not on GLP1-RA)
OR SU*DPP4-iƒ (if not on GLP1-RA)
OR SU*
DPP4-iƒ (if not on GLP1-RA)
OR SU*
GLP1-RA
(if SGLT2-i given or vice-versa) SGLT2-i
DPP4-iGLP1-RA∫
SU* (if DPP4- given)SU*
(if DPP4-i given) SU*
(if DPP4-i given)DPP4-i
(if not on GLP1-RA) GLP1-RA∫
SU*
(not advisable in Stages 4-5)
Low dose SU*
Basal OR premixed
insulin
(escalate to basal
bolus/switch to analogues)
+
TZD TZDSU* Basal OR premixed
insulin
(escalate to basal
bolus/switch to analogues)
+
Basal OR premixed insulin (escalate to basal bolus/switch
to analogues)
+
Basal OR premixed
insulin
(escalate to basal
bolus/switch to analogues)
+ Basal OR premixed
insulin
(escalate to basal
bolus/switch to analogues)
+
Basal OR premixed
insulin
(escalate to basal
bolus/switch to analogues)
+
Basal OR premixed
insulin
(escalate to basal
bolus/switch to analogues)
+
Normal weight Increased risk of
hypoglycaemia DKD Stage 3-5α High risk CVD ASCVD Heart failure
Figure 3-5: Suggested treatment approach for specific patient profiles.
1. Patients who are well-controlled on their existing therapies should continue with the treatment regime. 2. Bariatric surgery may be considered in patients with BMI ≥32 kg/m 2 and their T2DM cannot
be controlled by lifestyle changes and pharmacotherapy. CVD divided into 2 categories: ASCVD – established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) / High risk CVD – Primary Prevention, without
clinical CV events. ^ VLCD + MR P- Refer to Section 3.5.1; * SU refers to 2 nd generation sulphonylurea; ∫ Stop DPP4-i; ƒ Saxagliptin (SAVOR-TIMI) showed increased risk of hospitalisation for heart failure.
x Choose GLP1-RA with proven CV benefit and has appropriate label indication for CV reduction; α SGL T2i recommended in DKD stage 3-5 – for renoprotective effects, do not initiate when <30 ml/
min/1.73m2; however, eGFR levels at which SGL T2-i can be initiated may be subject to change as new evidence become available, + may switch to basal-bolus human/analogue insulin where appropriate;
for hypoglycaemic risk - insulin analogue may be more appropriate. DPP4-i: dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors; SGL T2-i: sodium-glucose cotransporter 2-inhibitors; SU: sulphonylurea; GLP1-RA: glucagon-like
peptide-1 receptor agonist; TZD: thiazolidinediones; VLCD: very low-calorie diet; MRP: meal replacement therapy.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 3-6: Efficacy of various GLDs.
MET144
(Level I)
SU151,154,155
(Level I) 156 (Level
II) 157 (Level I) GLN161 (Level I) AGI163 (Level I)
TZD 167172,302,303
(Level I)
DPP4-i
160,180-193
(Level I)
SGLT2-i
199,201-209,
955 (Level I)
GLP1-RA
120,213,214
(Level I)
Insulin 268,291,
292,304 (Level I)
HbA1c  % 1.0-1.5 0.4-1.6 1.0-1.2 0.5-0.8 0.5-1.4 0.5-0.8 0.2-0.8 0.5-1.4 >1.5
FPG vs. PPG FPG Both PPG PPG FPG Both Both Both Both
Hypoglycaemia         
Weight change       –  
GI symptoms         
CHF         
CVD         
Bone loss         
DKD Avoid* Hypo Hypo  Fluid ret’n Dose
adjustment a † Hypo
Increased risk Mild-mod risk Neutral Possible benefit Beneficial
* Avoid if eGFR < 30ml/min/1.73m 2; †avoid if eGFR < 15 ml/min/1.73m 2; aSGL T2-i can be used until dialysis is initiated and has proven reno-protection although glucoselowering efficacy is reduced.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.8 Monitoring
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG)
› SMBG is important in people with insulin treated T2DM.
› SMBG may improve glycaemic control in people with non-insulin
treated T2DM with short diabetes duration, HbA 1c ≥8% and/or
obesity.
› Mobile health may promote diabetes self-management, although
more evidence on application (apps) accuracy, data security,
accessibility and sustainability are required.
• Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
› CGM technology has evolved significantly in recent years with
emerging evidence as a useful tool in glycaemic monitoring in
people with T2DM.
› Ambulatory glucose profile and key glucose metrics derived from
CGM reports provide objective insights into individual glycaemic
variability that facilitate improved glycaemic management and
promote self-engagement.
3.8.1 Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c)
• HbA 1c assay must be standardised to the National Glycohemoglobin
Standardization Program (NGSP).
› NGSP results can be directly correlated with clinical outcomes especially
DCCT305 (Level I) and UKPDS306 (Level I) trials and therefore, the decision by most
guidelines to utilise HbA 1c for diabetes care goals and targets (NGSP
website is available at http://www.ngsp.org/ ).307 (Level III)
• The assay quality has been improved and calibrated via the International
Federation of Clinical Chemistry (IFCC). But, IFCC results are more accuracybased via latest and newer assay techniques (Conversion between NGSP and
IFCC is available at http://www.ngsp.org/convert1.asp).307 (Level III)
• Correlation between IFCC and NGSP is good, but the absolute numbers are
different. IFCC HbA 1c results are consistently 1.5-2.0% lower than NGSP
HbA1c results. NGSP HbA1c is reported as % while IFCC HbA1c is now reported
as mmol HbA1c/mol Hb.307 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-20: Relationships between NGSP, IFCC HbA1c and estimated average
glucose (eAG).
NGSP HbA1C (%) IFCC HbA1c (mmol/mol) eAG (mmol/L) (95% CI)
5.0 31 5.4 (4.2-6.7)
6.0 42 7.0 (5.5-8.5)
7.0 53 8.6 (6.8-10.3)
8.0 64 10.2 (8.1-12.1)
9.0 75 11.8 (9.4-13.9)
10.0 86 13.4 (10.7-15.7)
11.0 97 14.9 (12.0-17.5)
12.0 108 16.5 (13.3-19.3)
Calculator for converting HbA 1c results into estimated average glucose (eAG) is available at https://
professional.diabetes.org/diapro/glucose_calc. Master equation to interchange NGSP and IFCC values
is available as well. NGSP: National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program; IFCC: International
Federation of Clinical Chemistry.
Adapted from Nathan DM et al 2008,308(Level II-1) NGSP website.307 (Level III)
• Depending on the country and laboratory, HbA 1c results may be reported as
% (NGSP), mmol/mol which is mmol of HbA 1c/mol of haemoglobin (IFCC) or
estimated average glucose (eAG) as mmol/L. It can also be a combination of
any of the 3.
• In adults with T2DM, HbA1c can be measured at:72 (Level III)
› 3-6 monthly intervals, until the HbA1c is stable on unchanging therapy,
› 6 monthly intervals once the HbA 1c level and glucose-lowering therapy is
stable.
• HbA 1c has a strong predictive value for diabetes complications.
› Reduction in HbA 1c will result in a reduction in risk of microvascular
complications in the immediate short-term 24 (Level I) and macrovascular
complications in the long-term.24,309,310 (Level I)
• HbA 1c target should be individualised.
› Therapy in most patients with T2DM should be targeted to achieve HbA 1c
≤7.0%.
› A more aggressive target (≤6.5%) should be attempted in those with long
life-expectancy, no co-morbidities and in those whose targets can be
achieved without causing severe hypoglycaemia (Refer to Table 3-6).
• Despite the standardisation, sometimes the measured HbA 1c value may still
at times not reflect the true level of glycaemia (glycation gap) due to various
causes. 18 (Level I) 19 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-21: Causes that may affect the HbA1c value.
Higher
HbA1c values
Lower
HbA1c values
Either higher or lower
HbA1c values
• Rapidly improved
diabetes
• Age (older)
• Iron deficiency
• Vitamin B12
deficiency
• Folate deficiency
• Hypothyroidism
• Vitamin E
supplementation
• Sudden onset or
exacerbation of
diabetes
• Period of recovery
from iron deficiency
anaemia
• Hemolysis
• Blood loss/
transfusion
• Renal anaemia
during treatment
with erythropoietin
• Liver cirrhosis
• Asplenia
• Treatment with iron
• Treatment with B12
• Treatment with
folate
• Haemoglobinopathy
(depends on the type
of assay and type of
haemoglobin variant)
• Ethnicity (Indian
and Malays – higher
values, Chinese – lower
values)311 (Level II-2)
• Medications: Dapsone
Adapted from Campbell L et al 2019,18 (Level I) Japanese Diabetes Society 2016-2017.19 (Level III)
• For haemoglobin variants, NGSP via their website has published a list of HbA1c
methods and any possible interference (This is available at http://www.ngsp.
org/interf.asp.
• Recognise the occurrence of a possible glycation gap and in what
circumstances these may occur. Other methods of measuring glycaemia in
these situations should be considered, as listed below:41 (Level III)
› SMBG / preferably quality controlled capillary glucose profiles – this is the
most ideal/practical method; or
› total glycated haemoglobin estimation (if abnormal haemoglobins) using
boronate affinity methods. These are available in select hospitals.
• Other limitations of HbA1c are that it does not provide information on glucose
variability and does not capture hypoglycaemia. In such circumstances, a
combination of SMBG and HbA1c is appropriate.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Fructosamine estimation
• The evidence that correlates fructosamine to average glucose levels and its
prognostic significance are not as strong as HbA1c.312 (Level III)
• It is an alternative to HbA 1c in monitoring glycaemic control in patients in
whom HbA1c measurements may be inaccurate.
• It only reflects glycaemic control over the recent 2-3 weeks.
Point of care testing
• Point of care (POC) devices should not be used for diagnosis of T2DM.313 (Level I)
• However, POC devices are gaining popularity.
› POC devices fill an unmet need – making HbA1c assessment possible in the
more remote/interior regions of the country where laboratory facilities
are not readily available.
• Initial devices tended to underestimate HbA1c (i.e. below lab-based levels by
-0.962 to +0.1). But this negative bias has been improved by more recent POC
devices (+0.28 to +0.43).313 (Level I)
• This degree of imprecision may adversely affect management decision.
• As precision and accuracy in newer POC devices continue to improve, they
have the potential to be as accurate as laboratory based HbA 1c. This can
reduce cost, waiting time and necessity for multiple visits, improve QoL, and
increase accessibility to remote/interior areas and also for the paediatric
population (minimal blood needed).
• The main utility for POC devices will be in the monitoring of diabetes
management in follow-up of patients.
3.8.2 Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG)
• SMBG is the method of choice in assessing glycaemic control and prevent
hypoglycaemia.
› As part of an educational initiative, SMBG should be recommended in
patients treated with insulin(Level 1) and is desirable for those on OGLDs.6(Level III)
In out-patient setting
• Insulin treated T2DM
› Recommend routine SMBG to evaluate glycaemic control and prevent
hypoglycaemia.(Level I)
› Frequency and timing of SMBG vary based on types of insulin regimen
(Refer Section 3.6.5).6
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Non-insulin treated T2DM
› Earlier RCTs and meta-analyses suggest lack of benefit with SMBG in this
group.314 (Level I) 315 (Level II)
› However, recent meta-analyses and RCTs suggest that SMBG could
modestly reduce HbA1c by 0.12%-0.33%, especially in those with:316-322 (Level I)
- short duration of diabetes,
- suboptimal glycaemic control (baseline HbA1c ≥8%),
- obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m2).
› Greater glycaemic improvements were reported with:316-319,322,323 (Level I)
- more frequent SMBG,
- high levels of health literacy,
- structured SMBG and evaluation of technique with regular feedback*,
- adjustment of therapy (diet, physical activity and GLDs).**
*By health care providers (clinicians, diabetes-skilled allied health personnel).
** By patients themselves with emphasis on self-management support and on-going patient empowerment
by health care providers.316,323
Frequency and timing of SMBG
• Frequency and timing of SMBG should be tailored based on the patient’s
needs including glycaemic status, drug therapy, treatment goals and lifestyle
(dietary patterns and level of physical activity).(Level II-2)
• Re-evaluation of the need for and frequency of SMBG should be performed
by healthcare providers during each follow-up visit.(Level II-2)
• Ideally, SMBG should be performed on a daily basis in people with insulintreated T2DM or if possible, at least one 24-hour cycle on a weekly basis. (Level II-2)
Table 3-22: Recommendations for SMBG.
Mode of
Treatment
Breakfast Lunch Dinner
Pre Post Pre Post Pre
Post /
Pre-bed
Diet only √ √ - √ - √
OGLDs √ √ - √ - √
Insulin √ √ √ √ √ √
OGLDs: oral glucose-lowering drugs.
• Glucose monitoring in relation to different insulin regime.
› Once pre-prandial glucose levels are achieved, postprandial (PPG) testing
is recommended for fine adjustment of insulin dosage, taking into account
the effect of diet and physical activity levels.(Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 3-7: OGLDs + bedtime insulin-intermediate acting insulin.
Figure 3-8: OGLDs + once daily basal long acting insulin.
Bedtime Breakfast Lunch Dinner Time of
the day
Recommended timing of SMBG
: pre-breakfast
Bedtime Breakfast Lunch Dinner Time of
the day
Recommended timing of SMBG
: pre-breakfast
• Readings before breakfast give information about pre-bed intermediate
acting insulin (Figure 3-7) or once daily long acting insulin (Figure 3-8).
Figure 3-9: Basal bolus insulin regimen.
Bedtime Breakfast Lunch Dinner Time of
the day
Recommended timing of SMBG
: pre-meal/pre-bed
: post-meal
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Readings before breakfast give information about pre-dinner or pre-bed
intermediate acting insulin.
• Readings before other main meals (pre-lunch or pre-dinner) reflect short
acting insulin taken at the previous meal.
• Readings at pre-bed give information about short acting insulin given before
dinner (Figure 3-9).
Figure 3-10: Twice daily premixed human insulin regimen.
Bedtime Breakfast Lunch Dinner Time of
the day
Recommended timing of SMBG
: pre-meal/pre-bed
: post-meal
• Readings before breakfast give information about pre-dinner intermediate.
• Readings at pre-lunch give information about short acting insulin given
before breakfast.
• Readings at pre-dinner give information about the intermediate acting
insulin given before breakfast.
• Readings at pre-bed give information about short acting insulin given before
dinner.
• Monitoring of readings at post-meal is recommended when readings at premeal are on target (Figure 3-10).
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Figure 3-11: Twice daily premixed insulin analogue.
Figure 3-12: Thrice daily premixed insulin analogue.
Bedtime Breakfast Lunch Dinner Time of
the day
Recommended timing of SMBG
: pre-meal/pre-bed
: post-meal
Bedtime Breakfast Lunch Dinner Time of
the day
Recommended timing of SMBG
: pre-meal/pre-bed
: post-meal
• Readings before breakfast give information about pre-dinner long acting
insulin.
• Readings at pre-dinner give information about the long acting insulin given
before breakfast.
• Readings at post-meal give information about rapid acting insulin given
before each meal.
• There is less insulin stacking for twice daily premixed insulin analogue
compared to twice daily premixed human insulin (Refer to Figures 3-11 and
3-12).
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Role of mobile health (mHealth) in SMBG
• mHealth tools play an emerging role in diabetes prevention and
management.324-328 (Level I)
• Commonly available mHealth tools include:324,325 (Level I)
› short-messaging service (sms),
› apps (e.g. SMBG diary with or without therapy adjustment).
• mHealth may enhance patient engagement and clinical effectiveness.324,329 (Level I)
• mHealth tools should be user-friendly and literacy appropriate.324,329 (Level I)
• Compared to usual care, meta-analyses reported a modest reduction in
HbA1c by 0.44%-0.55%, increased glycaemic goal attainment and improved
self-management.326-328 (Level I)
• More research on apps accuracy, data security, accessibility, sustainability and
long-term health outcomes is required before large-scale implementation.325 (Level I)
For monitoring of glycaemic control in specific populations such as during Ramadan fasting (available
online at: https://www.diabetesmalaysia.com.my/article.php?aid=224), pregnancy (available online
at: http://www.acadmed.org.my/index.cfm?&menuid=67) and inpatients setting (Ministry of Health
Malaysia. Practical Guide to Inpatient Glycaemic Care, 2nd edition, May 2020), please refer to the relevant
Malaysian guidelines.
3.8.3 Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
• CGM measures interstitial glucose (which correlates closely to plasma
glucose) via a subcutaneously inserted sensor.
• Glucose readings are measured every 5 to 15 minutes.
• CGM can be classified into two types, retrospective (professional) and realtime (personal or flash).
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-23: Comparison of professional, personal or flash CGM.
Type of CGM
Professional
CGM
Personal
CGM
Flash
CGM
Usage frequency Intermittent Intermittent /
Continuous
Intermittent /
Continuous
Glucose data
display
Retrospective /
Blinded
Real-time
glucose levels
with trend
arrows and
graphic display
On demand
real-time
glucose levels
with trend
arrows and
graphic display
Capillary plasma
glucose calibration Required
Variable
depending on
device
Not required*
Hypo-/
Hyperglycaemia
alarm
x √ x
Devices required Sensor,
recorder
Sensor,
transmitter,
display unita
Sensor, reader /
mobile app
Sensor lifespan 6 days 6-90 days 14 days
User training
requirement + ++ +
Integration with
insulin pump x √b x
Report download √ √ √
Cost ++ +++ +
Interference /
Precaution of use
Paracetamol# MRI / X-ray, diving (>1 m depth for >30 min)
a Insulin pump, portable diabetes assistant or mobile app (bluetooth link)
b Medtronic 640G insulin pump
* factory calibrated; # may cause falsely elevated glucose readings up to 8 hours post ingestion.330 (Level II-2)
CGM: continuous glucose monitoring; MRI; magnetic resonance imaging.
Clinical benefits of CGM in the management of T2DM
• There is emerging evidence that CGM application in people with T2DM
provide a number of clinical benefits.
› Detection of unrecognised hypoglycaemia/hyperglycaemia and evaluation
of glycaemic variability.
- It provides objective insights into the key glucose metric i.e. time in
range (TIR).331,332 (Level II-1) 333,334 (Level II-2)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
- TIR is defined as percentage of glucose reading and time per day
within the target range of 3.9 mmol/L-10.0 mmol/L by the International
Consensus on TIR.335 (Level III)
› Improved glycaemic control (HbA1c) and/or TIR.
- Shows improvement of HbA1c ranging between 0.3%-0.7%.336-341 (Level I) 342 (Level II)
- Reduction in hypoglycaemia and increase in TIR.339,343 (Level I)
- Flash CGM users reported higher treatment satisfaction.340,341,343 (Level I)
› Effective motivational tool in improving adherence to therapeutic lifestyle
modification.338,344,345 (Level I) 342 (Level II-2)
Limitations and barriers to CGM use
• Cost/reimbursements – CGM is costly and not routinely reimbursed.
• Technological barriers – it is more important to focus on the overall glycaemic
patterns and trends than to focus on the absolute glucose levels. Accuracy
tends to be lower:346-348 (Level II-2) 349,350 (Level III)
› during the first 24 hours of sensor insertion,
› in the low end of glycaemic range; and
› during the phase of rapidly changing glucose levels related to time-lag
between interstitial and plasma glucose.
• Human (user) factors – adequate training is required for proper use and
interpretation of the report.335,349,351 (Level III)
Considerations for use of CGM in T2DM
• Advances in CGM technology have made it a potentially useful tool in the
day-to-day management of T2DM and may be considered in the following
situations:
› HbA1c above target despite intensive insulin therapy with multiple daily
injections [Grade B],
› suspected unrecognised hypoglycaemia, impaired hypoglycaemia awareness,
dawn phenomenon or delayed postprandial hyperglycaemia [Grade B],
› Special populations at high risk of severe hypoglycaemia (e.g. the elderly,
patients with advanced DKD) [Grade C], and
› Discrepant HbA1c with SMBG [Grade C].
• The choice and frequency of CGM devices should be individualised depending
on the primary goal and patients’ willingness to be actively engaged in their
day-to-day glucose management.
• To derive maximum benefits, it is essential to provide structured diabetes
education, training and support, assisted by a diabetes nurse educator.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.8.4 Monitoring of other risk factors
• Monitoring of glycaemic control, co-morbidities, complications and other
CVD risk factors should follow the schedule as laid out in Table 3-24.
Table 3-24: Clinical monitoring schedule for other risk factors in patients with T2DM.
Test Initial visit
3-monthly OR
Every follow-up
visit At annual visit
Physical examination
Weight √ √ √
Waist circumference √ √ √
BMI √ √
BP √ √ √
Eyea
Visual acuity
Fundoscopy/Fundus camera
√
√
√
√
Feet
Pulses/ABI
Neuropathy
√
√
√
√
√
√
Dental check-up √ √
ECGb √ √
Laboratory investigations
Plasma glucose √ √ √
HbA1c √ √ √
Lipid profilec √ √
Creatinine/BUSE + eGFRd √ √
LFT (AST, ALT) √ √
Urine microscopy √ √
Urine albumin/microalbumin/
spot morning urinary ACR √ √
√: conduct test conduct test if abnormal on initial visit or symptomatic no test is required
a Refer table 5-1 (Section 5.1) – 1-2 yearly if no diabetic retinopathy, more frequently according to
retinopathy status.
b Baseline resting ECG is recommended. If abnormal, refer to cardiology. However, if resting ECG is
normal, further screening for CVD is not recommended in asymptomatic patients with high risk of ASCVD,
provided they are receiving intensive medical therapy for optimal CV risk factor control (Refer Section
5.4). To date, CV risk assessment in asymptomatic patients is still controversial and evidence is evolving.
c Once statin is initiated, suggest checking lipid profile every 4-to-12 weeks to ascertain efficacy and
adherence, and annually thereafter (Refer Section 3.9.2).
d Serum creatinine with calculated eGFR, preferably using CKD-EPI formula (Refer Section 5.2).
BMI: body mass index; BP: blood pressure; ABI: ankle brachial index; ECG: electrocardiogram; BUSE:
blood urea and serum electrolytes; eGFR: estimated glomerular filtration rate; LFT: liver function test;
AST: aspartate aminotransferase; AL T: alanine aminotransferase; ACR: albumin-to-creatinine ratio; CVD:
cardiovascular disease; ASCVD: atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CV: cardiovascular.
Adapted from Asian-Pacific Type 2 Diabetes Policy Group and International Diabetes Federation (IDF)
Western Pacific Region, 2005352 (Level III) and Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes 2020.6 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations: Monitoring
2. To achieve HbA1c ≤7.0%, aim for FPG or pre-prandial
glucose targets of 4.4-7.0 mmol/L and 2-hour PPG
target of 4.4-8.5 mmol/L.
Grade B
3. SMBG should be recommended in patients on insulin
and is desirable for those on OGLDs. Grade C
4. CGM may be considered in patients with suboptimal
HbA1c or suspected to have unrecognised
hypoglycaemia on intensive insulin therapy.
Grade B
5. Monitoring of glycaemic control, co-morbidities,
complications and other CVD risk factors should
be done at initial visit and whenever indicated
subsequently.
Grade C
1. Glycaemic targets must be individualised. Therapy
in most patients with T2DM should be targeted to
achieve an HbA1c≤7.0% or 6.5% (where appropriate),
if achievable without significant hypoglycaemia.
Reduction in HbA1c has been shown to decrease the
risk of:
a. microvascular complications
b. macrovascular complications Grade B
Grade A
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.9 Management of co-morbidities in T2DM
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Hypertension:
› Target for initiation of treatment is systolic BP (SBP) ≥140 mmHg
and/or diastolic BP (DBP) ≥90 mmHg.
› Treatment target is SBP 130-139 mmHg and DBP 70-79 mmHg.
• Hyperlipidaemia
› All individuals with T2DM over the age of 40 should be treated
with a statin regardless of baseline LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) level.
› LDL-C targets have recently been revised to lower levels, according
to category of CV risk.
• Obesity
› A structured lifestyle modification that includes dietary
intervention with VLCD (≤800 kcal) using MRP products has
been shown to be effective in weight loss and reducing HbA 1c
in overweight and obese T2DM. Successful weight reduction of
>15% of body weight can result in diabetes remission.
› S/C liraglutide 3.0 mg daily, a recently approved anti-obesity
agent, may be effective for weight loss and reducing HbA1c.
› Comparing lifestyle intervention vs. metabolic surgery, the
surgical group achieved better diabetes remission rates and
was able to sustain better weight reduction after 2-5 years postsurgery. Metabolic surgery should be considered in those who
fulfil the criteria.
• Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
› Metabolic associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) is a new proposed
nomenclature to replace NAFLD as it includes a key driver of this
disease which, is presence of metabolic dysfunction.
› Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is highly prevalent among
patients with T2DM.
› T2DM is a risk factor for more severe NAFLD.
› Lifestyle intervention is the mainstay of treatment for NAFLD.
› Statin should be prescribed for treatment of dyslipidaemia in
NAFLD patients to reduce the risk of CVD.
› Patients suspected or confirmed to have more severe NAFLD should
be considered for referral to Gastroenterologist/Hepatologist for
further evaluation and management.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.9.1 Hypertension and T2DM
• Hypertension is a common co-morbidity of T2DM, with a prevalence of 80.4%
among patients who are followed up in the National Diabetes Registry.3 (Level II-3)
• Hypertension should be detected and treated early in the course of T2DM
to prevent CVD and to delay the progression of renal disease and diabetic
retinopathy.
• Reduction in systolic blood pressure (SBP) of 10 mmHg or diastolic blood
pressure (DBP) of 5 mmHg, irrespective of whether the patient has T2DM,
is associated with significant reductions in all major CV events by 20%, allcause mortality by 15%, stroke by 35%, coronary events by 20% and heart
failure by 40%.353,354 (Level I)
Treatment threshold
• Pharmacological treatment should be initiated in patients with T2DM when
BP is persistently ≥140 mmHg systolic and/or ≥ 90 mmHg diastolic.
› Meta-analyses have consistently shown significant risk reduction in
mortality, CHD, cerebrovascular disease and heart failure when treatment
is started at SBP ≥140 mm Hg. 355,356 (Level I) and DBP >90 mmHg.354 (Level I)
• Two meta-analyses354,355 (Level I) showed that lowering BP when initial SBP is
<140 mmHg, showed no additional CV benefits. Moreover, a more recent
systematic review found that it increased the risk of CV death (HR 1.15, 95%
CI 1.00,1.32), with no observed extra benefit in MI, stroke, heart failure or
ESKD.356 (Level I)
• There is insufficient evidence to date for benefits of starting treatment
when DBP is <90 mmHg (e.g. patients with high normal BP or 130-139/85-89
mmHg).357 (Level I)
Treatment target for SBP and DBP
• The ACCORD trial358 (Level I) showed no benefit in combined CV endpoints with
SBP <120 mmHg vs. <140 mmHg.
• A more recent meta-analysis 359 (Level I) demonstrated an increase of adverse
events,357 (Level I) with SBP <130 mmHg.
• In contrast, the SPRINT trial (patients with hypertension without T2DM),
lowering SBP to <120 mmHg vs. <140 mmHg resulted in 25% lower rates of
primary composite outcomes of MI, other acute coronary syndromes, stroke,
heart failure or death from CV causes.360 (Level I)
• In high risk patients with T2DM and coronary artery disease, lowering SBP
to <120 mmHg and DBP <70 mmHg, studies 361-366 (Level I) report adverse CV
outcomes supporting the existence of a J-curve phenomenon. This supports
targets for SBP of 130-139 mmHg and DBP 70-79 mmHg.(Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• In those who do not have pre-existing CHD, but have a higher risk of stroke
(such as Asian patients) and DKD, lower SBP target of <130 mmHg (but not
<120 mmHg) might be appropriate provided that it is well tolerated, to lower
the risk of stroke359 (Level I) and albuminuria.355,367 (Level I)
Management
• Non-pharmacological management cannot be overemphasized.
› Dietary counselling should target an optimal body weight.
› Dietary sodium restriction is advisable.
• Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) blockers are the first-line pharmacological
treatment of choice for patients with T2DM and hypertension.
› They are found to be more effective than other drug classes in reducing
the risk of CHD, all-cause death and composite of stroke, CHD, and heart
failure.359 (Level I)
• ACE inhibitors have been regarded as drug of choice based on extensive
data.368,369 (Level I)
› If an ACE inhibitor is not tolerated, an ARB should be considered.370 (Level I)
› ARBs have been reported to be superior to other non-RAS blocker
antihypertensive drugs in terms of slowing the progression of nephropathy
at the microalbuminuric and overt nephropathy stages.370-373 (Level I)
• Multiple drug therapy is generally required to achieve BP targets.
› 90% of patients require three antihypertensive medications to achieve
target.117 (Level I)
› Diuretics, calcium channel blockers (CCBs), beta-blockers and peripheral
alpha-blockers may be used as add-on therapy.
• Combination ACE inhibitor and ARB is not recommended.374 (Level I)
Table 3-25: Anti-hypertensive drugs for T2DM.
Diuretics β-blockers
ACE
inhibitors CCB
Peripheral
α-blockers ARB
T2DM
without
nephropathy
+ +/- +++ + +/- ++
T2DM with
nephropathy ++ +/- +++ ++ +/- +++
The grading of recommendation from (+) to (+++) is based on increasing levels of evidence and/or current
widely accepted practice. (+/-) indicates to use with care.
ACE: angiotensin-converting enzyme; CCB: calcium channel blocker; ARB: angiotensin-receptor blocker.
Adapted from Malaysian CPG for Management of Hypertension (5th ed) 2018.375 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations: Hypertension and T2DM
1. For patients with T2DM, the treatment threshold
for starting pharmacological therapy is ≥140 mmHg
systolic and/or ≥90 mmHg diastolic.
Grade A
2. No CV benefit is seen for starting pharmacological
therapy in patients with T2DM whose BP are in the
high normal range: 130-139/80-89 mmHg.
Grade A
4. Pharmacological treatment should be initiated in
patients with T2DM when the BP is persistently
≥140 mm Hg systolic and/or ≥90 mm Hg diastolic.
Grade A
5. ARBs or ACEIs are the first-line BP agents of choice
for patients with T2DM and hypertension. Grade A
6. Combined use of ACE-i and ARB is not recommended. Grade A
3. In patients with T2DM with hypertension, it is
recommended for individuals without pre-existing
CHD and who are at higher risk of stroke or DKD to:
a. target SBP <130 mmHg (if tolerated but, not to
<120 mmHg),
b. target DBP to 70-79 mmHg, but not <70 mmHg.
Grade A
Grade A
3.9.2 Hyperlipidaemia and T2DM
• T2DM is a CHD defining disease.
• Control of hyperglycaemia alone has a modest and heterogeneous effect on
reduction of CVD.310,376 (Level I) and may take long periods to manifest.377 (Level I)
• In contrast, multifactorial intervention has been shown to reduce microvascular
complications, CV events and mortality in the STENO-2 study.35,36 (Level I)
• Thus, efforts must also be directed to address other risk factors such as
dyslipidaemia, hypertension and prior CV events.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Screening
• In adult patients, test for lipid disorders at least annually and more often if
needed to achieve goals.
› Non-fasting sample can be used for assessment of lipid parameters.
› If non-fasting TG is elevated (>2.3 mmol/L), a fasting sample is required.
• In adolescents with T2DM, screening for lipid disorders should be done
at diagnosis after glycaemic control is achieved. If lipid values are within
targets, screening should be repeated annually thereafter.6,378-380 (Level III)
• CV risk calculators for primary prevention are not recommended as
individuals with T2DM are already considered high risk and all CV risk factors
should be aggressively managed (Refer to Section 5.4-A).
Targets
A. Primary target: LDL-C
• All patients over the age of 40 should be treated with a statin regardless of
baseline LDL cholesterol level (Refer Table 3-26).381,382 (Level I)
› Statin is not recommended in women of child-bearing potential who are
not using adequate contraception and is contraindicated during pregnancy.
• The LDL-C targets depends on the patient’s CV risk category (Table 3-26).
› Very low LDL-C level achieved by newer lipid lowering drugs had shown
further CV risk reduction in large scale clinical trials proportionate to the
degree of LDL-C lowering. 383-390 (Level I) The absolute risk reduction is most
evident in patients with higher CV risk.
Table 3-26: LDL-C targets.
Risk categories for patients with T2DM
Target
LDL-C
(mmol/L)
Target
Non-HDL-C
(mmol/L)
Very high risk383-386
(Level I)
Patients with diabetes
and established CVD
OR
Other target organ
damage
OR
≥3 risk factors
<1.4 <2.2
High risk383,386 (Level I)
Patients with diabetes
for ≥10 years without
target organ damage
AND any other
additional risk factor
<1.8 <2.6
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Moderate risk383,386
(Level I)
<50-year-old with T2DM
of <10 years duration
without other risk
factors
<2.6 <3.4
Non-HDL-C: calculated as Total cholesterol – HDL-C. LDL-C targets depends on the patients’ CV risks as
detailed above.
LDL-C: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; Non-HDL-C: Non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; CVD:
cardiovascular disease.
Adapted from Cosentino F, et al. 2020.43
• If the above targets are unattainable, aim for a 50% reduction of pre-treatment
LDL-C level.383,386 (Level I)
B. Secondary targets: Non-HDL-C, HDL-C and TG
• In patients with high TG >4.5 mmol/L, when the LDL-C cannot be calculated,
non-HDL level is a target of therapy and can be calculated from non-fasting
serum.
Table 3-27: Secondary targets.
Parameter Targets
Non-HDL-C 0.8 mmol/L above the LDL-C target according to risk
category (Refer Table 3-30)
HDL-C >1.0 mmol/L for males; >1.3 mmol/L for females
TG < 1.7 mmol/L
Non-HDL-C: Non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; HDL-C: high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; TG:
triglycerides; LDL-C: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Adapted from Mach F, et al. 2020.391
Management
• Lifestyle modification focusing on:
› reduction of saturated fat, trans-fat and cholesterol intake,
› increasing intake of dietary n-3 fatty acids, viscous fibre and plant stanols /
sterols,
› weight loss (if indicated); and
› increasing physical activity
• Lowering LDL-C is the main aim of treatment and statins are the first-line
lipid lowering drug.
• Statin therapy should be intensified to achieve LDL-C goal before considering
combination therapy.
• If the target LDL-C is not achieved with maximal tolerated dose of statin
therapy, combination therapy with ezetimibe is recommended.384,385 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• For very high-risk patients, Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin/Kexin Type 9
(PCSK9) inhibitors should be considered if maximal tolerated dose of statin
and ezetimibe fail to achieve LDL-C targets.387-390 (Level I)
• In patients with high TG, improving diabetes control and lifestyle modification
is emphasized.
• Investigate for secondary causes, if fasting TG >5.7 mmol/L and consider
pharmacological therapy with fibrate and/or fish oil (2-4g/day) to reduce the
risk of pancreatitis.
• Nicotinic acid should only be used in patients with high risk of pancreatitis
with a TG level of >10 mmol/L, in those who do not respond adequately to
fibrates and/or fish oil.392-394 (Level I)
• In patients with ASCVD or high CV risk and elevated triglycerides, the
addition of icosapent ethyl 4 mg/day to statin has been shown to reduce CV
risk by 25%.395 (Level I)
• In patients with TG >2.3 mmol/L and low HDL-C, fibrates may be considered
in combination with statin.396-399 (Level III)
• In patients with established retinopathy, fenofibrate reduces progression of
diabetic retinopathy, irrespective of baseline TG/HDL-C level.400,401 (Level I)
• In T2DM patients below 21-year-old without clinical ASCVD, statin is generally
not recommended.378-380 (Level III)
Table 3-28: Lipid lowering drugs for dyslipidaemia in T2DM.
Lipid goal Initial drug
Suggested addition in
order of preference
Lower LDL-C Statins
Ezetimibe
PCSK9 inhibitor
BAS (may increase TG)
Lower TG Fibrates
Omega-3 fatty acid
Statins*
Nicotinic acid**
Treat combined
hyperlipidaemia Statins*
Fibrates
BAS and fibrates
PCSK9
Ezetimibe
*High dose may be required; **With careful monitoring and keeping dose <1.5 g/day.
LDL-C: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; TG: triglycerides; PCSK9: Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin/
Kexin Type 9; BAS: bile acid sequestrants.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-29: Effect of lipid lowering therapy on lipids.*
Lipid lowering
therapy LDL-C TG HDL-C
Statin  30%-60%  10%-20%  1%-10%
BAS  20%-30% May  
Ezetimibe  10%-20%  10%  1%-5%
PCSK9 inhibitor  60%  25%  10%
Fibrate 20%  25%-50%  10%-20%
Omega 3 fatty
acid (2-4g) Variable effect  20%-45%  1%-10%
Nicotinic acid 10%-20%  20%-50%  20%-25%
*Effect varies with individual, baseline lipid levels and, dose and type of drugs used.
LDL-C: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; TG: triglycerides; HDL-C: high-density lipoprotein cholesterol;
PCSK9: Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin/Kexin Type 9; BAS: bile acid sequestrants. Data extracted from
Mach F, et al. 2020.391
Table 3-30: Effect of various statins on LDL-C.
High Intensity Moderate Intensity Low Intensity
LDL-C
lowering ≥ 50% 30-49% <30%
Statins
Atorvastatin
40-80 mg
Atorvastatin
10-20mg
Rosuvastatin
20-40 mg
Rosuvastatin
5-10 mg
Simvastatin
20-40 mg Simvastatin 10 mg
Pravastatin
40-80mg
Lovastatin 40-80 mg
Pravastatin
10-20 mg
Lovastatin 20 mg
LDL-C: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Adapted from Stone NH, et al.2014.402
Recommendations: Dyslipidaemia and T2DM
1. All patients over the age of 40 should be treated with
a statin regardless of baseline LDL-cholesterol levels. Grade A
2. Statin therapy should be intensified to achieve LDL-C
goal based on CV risk. Grade A
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.9.3 Obesity and T2DM
• In the Malaysian National Health Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2015, 33.4% and
30.6% of adults (>18 years old) were overweight and obese (BMI according
to the Malaysian CPG on Management of Obesity, 2004).403,404
• Based on the 2019 National Diabetes Registry 405 (Level II-3) data sourced
from primary care health clinics, 84% of individuals with T2DM are either
overweight or obese (Available at: http://ndr.moh.gov.my/report/clinical_audit/
crn1). People with diabetes who are overweight or obese have higher risk of
complications.
• Lifestyle intervention focusing on weight loss showed improvement in HbA1c
and other CV risk factors.79,406 (Level I)
• Many GLDs are associated with weight gain, and attempts should be made
to minimise these medications without compromising glycaemic control or
to switch to alternative agents not associated with weight gain. Table 3-31
shows the GLDs and their effect on weight.
Table 3-31: GLDs and their effect on weight.
Weight gain Weight neutral Weight loss
Insulin Metformin GLP1-RA
TZDs AGIs SGL T2-i
SU DPP4-i
Meglitinides
TZDs: thiazolidinediones; SU: sulphonylurea; AGIs: alpha-glucosidase inhibitors; DPP4-i: dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 inhibitors; GLP1-RA: glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists; SGL T2-1: sodium-glucose
cotransporter 2 inhibitors.
Adapted from Lau DC et al. Can J Diabetes 2015.407
Assessment and treatment of overweight and obesity
• The initial assessment of people with diabetes should include height, weight,
BMI (kg/m2) and waist circumference.
• Weight loss of between 5%-10% will improve glycaemic control, BP, lipid
profile and QoL.79,406 (Level I)
• The goals of therapy are to achieve optimal glycaemic and metabolic control.
• The mainstay of treatment should be through lifestyle modification which
include behavioural change, physical activity and dietary interventions (Refer
Sections 3.5.1 & 3.5.2).
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-32: Classification of weight by BMI.
Classification BMI (kg/m2) Risk of co-morbidities
Underweight <18.5 Low (but increased risk of other
clinical problems
Normal range 18.5-22.9 Optimal
Overweight ≥23.0
• Pre-obese 23.0-27.4 Increased
• Obese I 27.5-34.9 High
• Obese II 35.0-39.9 Very High
• Obese III ≥40.0 Extremely high
Classification of BMI based on the Malaysian CPG on Management of Obesity, 2004.403
Adapted from WHO Consultation Group.404 BMI: body mass index.
Management
A. Non-pharmacological intervention
• Nutritionally balanced, energy-reduced dietary interventions are
recommended for healthier body weight to be achieved (Refer Section 3.5.1).
› Weight loss >5% is needed to see beneficial effect on HbA 1c, lipid and
BP.79,408 (Level I)
› Caloric restriction of 1200-1500 kcal/day for women and 1500-1800 kcal/
day for men is useful for rapid weight loss.77 (Level I)
• Use of MRP, with close patient monitoring, can be beneficial. DiRECT, an
open randomised trial involving overweight or obese patients with T2DM
were treated with total diet replacement (825 kcal) at primary care level.
A significant weight loss of 15 kg (24%) and diabetes remission (46%) were
seen in the intervention group.95 (Level I)
• Very low calorie diet (VLCD) with a total MRP of <800 kcal/day may
achieve greater short-term weight loss (10%-15%) with greater glycaemic
improvement, as shown in the DROPLET study.409 (Level I)
› Overweight or obese subjects were managed by their primary care doctors
and given MRP for 8 weeks followed by food re-introduction over 4 weeks.
› At week 13 onwards, subjects were encouraged to take MRP once or twice
daily.
› Significant weight loss at week 12, -9.6 kg (-11.0 kg to -8.2 kg) was seen and
was sustained at 12 months, -7.2 kg (-9.4 kg to -4.9 kg).
› Risk of weight rebound after discontinuing the program was not seen in
this study.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Increased physical activity consisting of at least 150 minute/week of
moderate-intensity exercise (Refer Section 3.5.2).
› This includes muscle strengthening and resistance exercise 2 to 3 times/
week. 410 (Level III)
› Overweight or obese persons with T2DM should increase the exercise
duration to >60 minutes per day/approximately 450 minutes per/week for
weight reduction.135 (Level III)
• Frequent contact with healthcare providers and behavioural therapy should
be part of the intervention.
B. Pharmacological intervention
• Pharmacotherapy can be considered for patients with T2DM with BMI
≥27.0 kg/m2 after failing 6 months of lifestyle modification.403 (Level III)
• Three anti-obesity agents have been approved, phentermine,411,412 (Level I) 413 (Level
II-1) orlistat414-416 (Level I) 417 (Level II-3) and high dose liraglutide (3 mg/day)408,418-422 (Level I)
for the management of obesity.
Table 3-33: Approved anti-obesity drugs.
Drug Class MOA
Recommended
duration
Net
weight
loss
(kg)
Precautions
and side
effects
Phentermine411,
412 (Level I) 413 (Level II-1)
Sympathomimetic
amine
Appetite
suppression
3 months
(can be used
cyclically)
3.6
• Only
indicated for
short-term
use.
• Precautions
in poorly
controlled
BP and
coronary
artery
disease
Orlistat414-416 (Level
I) 417 (Level II-3)
Lipase
inhibitor
Reduces
GI fat
absorption
Up to 4 years 6.9
• Liquid or
oily stool, oil
leakage from
rectum and
flatulence.
• MVT
replacements
if used >12
months.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Liraglutide,
3.0 mg408,418-422
(Level I) GLP-1 RA
Slows
gastric
motility,
reduces
satiety
56 weeks 6.4
• Nausea and
vomiting
• Pancreatitis
• Cholelithiasis
BP: blood pressure; GI: gastrointestinal; GLP1-RA: glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists; MVT: multivitamins.
C. Surgical intervention
• Bariatric surgery should be considered when lifestyle and pharmacological
interventions have failed in the obese with T2DM and at high CVD risk with
suboptimal glycaemic control.403 (Level III)
• International diabetes organisations developed a consensus treatment 423
(Level III) algorithm for metabolic surgery in T2DM (Diabetes Surgery Summit-II,
DSS-II). Metabolic surgery should be recommended for Asians with T2DM as
below:
› ≥37.5 kg/m2,
› ≥32.5 kg/m2 to 37.4 kg/m 2 with inadequately controlled hyperglycaemia
despite lifestyle modification and optimal medical treatment; and
› ≥27.5 kg/m2 to 32.5 kg/m2 - it can be considered in those with inadequately
controlled hyperglycaemia despite optimal medical treatment.
• The Asian Consensus Meeting on Metabolic Surgery (ACMOMS) recommends
bariatric surgery for the following persons with diabetes:*424 (Level III)
› >32 kg/m2
› >30 kg/m2 with 1 or more features of metabolic syndrome
*After review of the ACMOMS and DSS-II consensus, the evidence supports
the efficacy of bariatric surgery in the above individuals. However, this should
be performed at centres of excellence that perform high-volume surgery.
• Evaluation for the appropriateness of surgery should be performed by a
multidisciplinary team consisting of endocrinologist, bariatric surgeon,
psychiatrist, dietitian and physiotherapist prior to surgery.423 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Table 3-34: Criteria for bariatric surgery.
Factors Criteria
Weight loss
history
Failure of previous attempts at weight reduction,
including programs such as weight watchers etc.
Commitment
Expectation that patient will adhere to postoperative
care consisting of:
• follow up visits with health care team,
• adherence to medical management,
• continued dietary restriction
Exclusion
criteria
• BMI <30 kg/m2 or <27.5 kg/m2 for Asians
• Current drug or alcohol abuse
• Severe psychiatric illness
• Lack of comprehension of the benefits, risks, expected
outcomes and required lifestyle changes
BMI: body mass index.
Adapted from Mechanick JI, et al. Obesity 2009.425
• Choice of procedure
› Bariatric surgery procedures can be classified as restrictive or malabsorptive
or combined restrictive and malabsorptive.424,426-428 (Level I)
- The most commonly performed surgical procedures for reversing/
improving diabetes are roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) and sleeve
gastrectomy (SG).427,429 (Level I)
- Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB) has been demonstrated
to have intermediate success.427,429 (Level I)
• Recent meta-analyses reports show mean excess weight loss 10 years after
bariatric surgery is 56.7%, 74.1%, 58.3%, 45.9% in RYGB, Biliopancreatic
diversion (BPD), SG and LAGB respectively.429,430 (Level I)
• The magnitude of HbA 1c reduction ranges between 2.5%-2.8% for SG 431,432
and 2.6%-4.4% for RYBG.433-435 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• In addition, there is metabolic improvement as shown in Table 3-35 below.
Table 3-35: Metabolic improvement associated with bariatric surgery.
Disease
% of Improvement or remission
At 2 years At 5-7 years At 10 years
T2DM 72%436
80.3%426
54%437
88%432
36%436
Hypertension 24%436 66%438 41%436
Hypertriglyceridaemia 62%436 82%439 46%436
Hypercholesterolaemia 22%436 53%440 21%436
NAFLD
84% steatosis
resolution,
75% fibrosis
resolution441
NAFLD: non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Adapted from Vest AR et al. Circulation; 2013.442
• The ABCD (age, BMI, c-peptide, duration) score is a surgical scoring for T2DM
patients to predict the success of surgical intervention (Refer Table 3-36).
With a score of ≥4, the remission rate for T2DM is >50%.443 (Level II-2)
Table 3-36: ABCD score for prediction of T2DM remission
Variable
Points on ABCD index for gastric bypass
0 1 2 3
Age ≥40 <40
BMI (kg/m2) <27 27-34.9 35-41.9 ≥42
c-peptide (mmol/L) <2 2-2.9 3-4.9 ≥5
Duration of T2DM
(years) >8 4-8 1-3.9 <1
The age, BMI, c-peptide and duration of T2DM (ABCD) scoring. The total possible score value range from
0-10. The higher the score, the higher percentage for T2DM remission.
Adapted from Lee WJ et al. Surg Obes Relat Dis; 2013.443 (Level II-2)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations: Obesity and T2DM
1. In overweight or obese persons with diabetes, at each
clinic encounter, BMI and waist circumference should
be measured and documented.
Grade A
2. Overweight or obese persons with T2DM should be
strongly advised to aim for a target weight loss of
5%-10% and be informed of the health benefits.
Grade A
3. A structured program of lifestyle modification that
includes low calorie diet and regular physical activity
(250-450 minutes/week) has been shown to improve
glycaemic control and weight loss.
Grade A
4. MRP and VLCD dietary intervention can be
considered in selected patients with aims of
achieving diabetes remission.
Grade B
5. The use of anti-obesity agents in obese T2DM
patients is an effective option for those who fail
lifestyle intervention.
Grade A
6. Bariatric surgery may be considered in those who
fulfil the criteria. Grade A
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
3.9.4 Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
• A new proposed nomenclature for NAFLD is “metabolic associated fatty
liver disease” or MAFLD. The major benefit of this new nomenclature is a
shift towards a diagnosis of inclusion based on the presence of metabolic
dysfunction, the key driver of the disease.949 Note that the following section
still refers to NAFLD.
• Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) encompasses a spectrum of liver
conditions characterised by excess accumulation of fat in the liver that is
associated with chronic overnutrition.444 (Level II-2)
• NAFLD is closely associated with obesity and is considered as the liver
manifestation of the metabolic syndrome.444 (Level II-2)
• For a strict definition of NAFLD, significant alcohol intake (more than two
standard drinks/day for men or more one standard drink/day for women),
drugs that can cause hepatic steatosis and other causes of liver diseases (e.g.
chronic hepatitis B and C virus infection) should be excluded.444 (Level II-2)
• Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is the more severe form of NAFLD
that is defined histologically by the presence of lobular inflammation and
hepatocyte ballooning.444 (Level II-2)
• Patients with NASH are more likely to develop liver fibrosis and cirrhosis, and
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).444 (Level II-2)
• T2DM is a risk factor for NASH and advanced liver fibrosis, 445 (Level II-2) which
is one of the leading causes of liver transplantation for cirrhosis and for
HCC.446,447 (Level II-2)
• In Malaysia, the prevalence of NAFLD among patients with T2DM has been
estimated to be 49.6% based on ultrasonography and 72.4% based on
controlled attenuation parameter.448 (Level II-2)
• A study using liver stiffness measurement (measured using transient
elastography e.g. Fibroscan; a non-invasive procedure) estimated the
prevalence of advanced liver fibrosis among patients with diabetes mellitus
to be 21.0%.449 (Level II-2)
• The same study using liver stiffness measurement ≥8 kPa to identify patients
with diabetes mellitus for liver biopsy found that the majority of the patients
had NASH (83.1%) and some degree of liver fibrosis (87.1%), while advanced
liver fibrosis was diagnosed in 36.6%.449 (Level II-2)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Assessment
Table 3-37: Modalities for NAFLD assessment and recommended intervals for
testing.
Assessment Result Action
Blood tests
(e.g. ALT and
AST)
Normal AL T
and AST
Repeat AL T and
AST annually
Elevated AL T
and AST*
• US abdomen to
diagnose fatty
liver/exclude
focal liver lesion
• Repeat AL T and
AST after 3-6
months
• Exclude other
causes of liver
disease
• Consider referral to
Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
Fibrosis-4
scoring
Fibrosis-4
index <1.3
Repeat every 2-3
years
Fibrosis-4
index ≥1.3
Refer for
liver stiffness
measurement
(Refer to Table
3-38)
Consider referral to
Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
* Exclude possibility of drug-induced liver injury.
AL T: Alanine aminotransferase; AST: Aspartate aminotransferase; US: ultrasound. For Fibrosis-4 index and
assessment of NAFLD in T2DM illustrated as a flow chart refer to Appendix 9.
• Drug-induced liver injury is a common cause of elevated AL T and AST.
› A careful history about intake of medicines (prescribed, over-the-counter
or traditional) or supplements should be obtained.
› If the medicine or supplement is considered to be the cause of the elevated
AST and AL T, it should be stopped.
› The AST and AL T should be repeated 1-3 months later.
• Persistently elevated serum alanine aminotransferase (AL T) and/or aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) levels in patients with T2DM and NAFLD may
indicate the presence of NASH. However, normal serum AL T and AST levels
do not exclude NASH and advanced liver fibrosis.450,451 (Level II-2)
• US examination of the liver should be performed in patients with T2DM and
elevated serum AL T and/or AST to diagnose fatty liver and to exclude focal
liver lesion.
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• Non-invasive fibrosis score, such as fibrosis-4 index (refer to Appendix 9),
may be used to risk stratify patients with T2DM and NAFLD.452,453 (Level II-2)
› Patients with a low score are unlikely to have advanced liver fibrosis,
while those with indeterminate or high scores should be referred for liver
stiffness measurement.
Table 3-38: Interpretation of liver stiffness measurements and recommended
action.
Liver stiffness
measurement (kPa)* Interpretation Action
<10
Unlikely to have
advanced liver
fibrosis
10-15
May have
advanced liver
fibrosis
• Requires monitoring e.g.
repeat in 1 year
• Consider referring to
Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
>15
Likely to have
advanced liver
fibrosis
• Should be considered for
HCC surveillance
• Consider referring to
Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
>20-25 (and/
or presence of
thrombocytopaenia)
Likely to have
clinically
significant portal
hypertension
• Should be considered for
HCC surveillance and variceal
screening
• Requires referral to
Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
*values obtained by transient elastography.
kPa: kilopascals; HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma.
Adapted from Wong VW, et. Al. 2019.454 (Level II-2)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations: Assessment of NAFLD
1. Patients with T2DM should have platelet count, and
serum AL T and AST levels performed for assessment
for NASH and advanced liver fibrosis. This may be
repeated annually or more frequently, as indicated.
Grade A
2. US examination of the liver should be performed in
patients with T2DM and elevated serum AL T and/or
AST to diagnose fatty liver and to exclude focal liver
lesion.
Grade A
3. Patients with persistently elevated serum AL T and/
or AST level should be investigated to exclude other
causes of chronic liver disease.
Grade A
4. Patients with indeterminate or high serum
biomarkers of fibrosis should be referred for liver
stiffness measurement.
Grade A
5. Patients with persistently elevated serum AL T
and/or AST level or elevated liver stiffness
measurement should be considered for referral
to Gastroenterologist/Hepatologist for further
evaluation and management.
Grade A
6. A liver biopsy may be considered for definitive
diagnosis of NASH and/or advanced liver fibrosis. Grade A
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Treatment
• The mainstay of treatment of NAFLD is lifestyle intervention.455 (Level II-2)
› A balanced, reduced calorie, individually tailored diet (for overweight/
obese persons with T2DM) to enable weight loss which includes limiting
excess fructose consumption such as avoiding beverages with added
fructose and foods with high fructose corn syrup, choosing complex CHO,
high fibre foods and avoiding processed foods.456 (Level II-2)
- A study on biopsy-proven NASH patients found that weight loss of ≥10%
through lifestyle intervention over 52 weeks resulted in NASH resolution
and fibrosis improvement in 90% and 45% of patients, respectively.455 (Level II-2)
› Avoid excessive alcohol consumption (refer above).457 (Level II-2)
› Moderate-intensity exercise ≥30 minutes/day for ≥5 days/week or a total
of ≥150 minutes/week, or vigorous-intensity exercise for ≥20 minutes/day
for ≥3 days/week or a total of ≥75 minutes/week (any new activity should
be started slowly and, its intensity and duration gradually increased).458 (Level I)
› Smoking cessation to reduce CVD risk.459 (Level II-1)
• GLP1-RA has been shown to be associated with significantly greater NASH
resolution and lesser fibrosis progression in a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial.460 (Level I)
• SGL T2-i has been shown to significantly reduce liver fat based on magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)-proton density fat fraction (a MRI-based technique
for measurement of liver fat) and serum AL T level in a RCT, 461 (Level I) and may
be useful for the treatment of NASH based on a pilot study using paired liver
biopsy.462 (Level II-2)
• Pioglitazone has been shown to significantly reduce steatosis, lobular
inflammation and hepatocyte ballooning in biopsy-proven NASH patients,463
(Level I) but its use has been associated with significant weight gain that
persisted after discontinuation of therapy. There are also continued concerns
about risk of CCF, osteoporosis and bladder cancer.
• Vitamin E has been shown to significantly reduce steatosis, lobular
inflammation and hepatocyte ballooning in biopsy-proven NASH patients
without T2DM,463 (Level I) but its use has been associated with concerns about
risk of prostate cancer and increased all-cause mortality.
› In a study of biopsy-proven NASH patients with T2DM, vitamin E did not
achieve the primary endpoint of 2-point reduction in the NAFLD activity
score from 2 different parameters, but did result in significantly greater
NASH resolution compared with placebo.464 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
• CVD is the leading cause of mortality in patients with NAFLD. NAFLD
and CVD share common risk factors. 465 (Level II-3) Meta-analyses 466,467 (Level II-3)
performed demonstrate an association between NAFLD and increased CVD
events, especially for those with severe NAFLD or NASH.
› Risk factors for CVD should be evaluated and managed accordingly to
reduce the risk of CVD.
› Statins reduce the risk of CVD in patients with dyslipidaemia but is under
prescribed among patients with NAFLD.
- In a study on 428 NAFLD patients, 74.1% of patients who should have
been receiving statin therapy were not while 58.9% of patients who
were on statins did not achieve the treatment LDL-C target.468 (Level II-2)
- Serious liver injury from statins is rare and it is safe to be prescribed for
most NAFLD patients.
Recommendations: Treatment of NAFLD
1. Lifestyle intervention is the mainstay of treatment of
NAFLD. Grade A
2. Statins should be prescribed for treatment of
dyslipidaemia in NAFLD patients, when indicated, to
reduce the risk of CVD.
Grade A
3. GLP1-RA and/or SGL T2-i should be considered for
the treatment of T2DM in patients with suspected or
confirmed NASH and/or advanced liver fibrosis.
Grade B
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Diabetic ketoacidosis
› Weight-based fixed rate intravenous insulin infusion (FRIII) is the
current standard recommendation and the use of ‘sliding scale’
insulin should no longer be practised.
• Euglycaemic ketoacidosis
› Although this has been known in T1DM, it can occur in patients
with T2DM treated with SGL T2-i, precipitated by stress, and/or
omission of insulin.
› Awareness, prompt recognition, timely diagnosis and management
is required.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC
METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
4.1 Hypoglycaemia
• Hypoglycaemia is defined by either one of the following three conditions:
› low plasma glucose level (<3.9 mmol/L);
› presence of autonomic or neuroglycopenic symptoms (Refer Table 4-1),
› reversed by CHO intake.
Table 4-1: Symptoms of hypoglycaemia*.
Autonomic Neuroglycopenic
• Trembling
• Palpitations
• Sweating
• Anxiety
• Hunger
• Nausea
• Tingling
• Difficulty concentrating
• Confusion
• Weakness/stroke like symptoms
• Drowsiness
• Vision changes
• Difficulty speaking
• Headache
• Seizures/coma
* Glucose level at which an individual becomes symptomatic is highly variable.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Table 4-2: Classification of hypoglycaemia.
Level Glycaemic criteria Description
1 <3.9 mmol/L but
≥3.0 mmol/L
• Recognised as a threshold for
neuroendocrine responses to falling
glucose in people without diabetes.
2 <3.0 mmol/L
• Threshold at which neuroglycopenic
symptoms begin to occur.
• Requires immediate action to resolve the
hypoglycaemic event.
3 -
• A severe event characterised by altered
mental and/or physical functioning that
requires assistance from another person
for recovery.
• Risk factors for hypoglycaemia include:
› advancing age,
› severe cognitive impairment,
› poor health knowledge,
› uncontrolled T2DM with glucose variability,
› hypoglycaemia unawareness,
› long duration of insulin therapy,
› renal and hepatic impairment,
› peripheral and autonomic neuropathy.
• Strategies for prevention of hypoglycaemia:
› identifying patients at risk,
› education on recognising symptoms of hypoglycaemia,
› structured educational and psycho-behavioural programs (e.g. Blood
glucose awareness training) that may help to improve detection of
hypoglycaemia and reduce the frequency of severe episodes.470,471 (Level I)
• Patients at risk of hypoglycaemia should be discouraged from driving motorvehicles, cycling, swimming or operating heavy machinery, as these activities
may endanger oneself and the public.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Treatment of hypoglycaemia
• The aims of treatment are to:
› detect and treat a low plasma glucose level promptly,
› eliminate the risk of injury to oneself and to relieve symptoms quickly; and
› avoid over-correction of hypoglycaemia especially in repeated cases as this
will lead to poor glycaemic control and weight gain.40 (Level III)
• In Level I and Level 2 hypoglycaemia the patient should ingest: 472,473 (Level II-3)
6,40,474 (Level III)
› 15 g of simple CHO e.g.
- 1 tablespoon of honey,
- 150-200 ml of fruit juice such as orange juice or regular soft drink; or
- 3 teaspoons of table sugar dissolved in water.
› Measure plasma glucose after 15 minutes.
› If the level at 15 minutes is still <3.9 mmol/L, another 15 g of CHO should
be taken.
› People taking AGIs (acarbose) must use glucose (dextrose) tablets or, if
unavailable, milk or honey to treat the hypoglycaemia.
• In Level 3 hypoglycaemia,6,40,474 (Level III)
› where the individual is still conscious, administer 20 g of CHO and the
above steps are repeated.
› where the individual is unconscious, administer:
- 20-50 ml of Dextrose (D) 50% intravenously (IV) over 1-3 minutes, or
- 75-100 ml of D20% over 15 minutes, or
- 1 mg glucagon subcutaneously (SC) or intramuscularly (IM).
- Outside the hospital setting, a tablespoon of honey (or equivalent e.g.
maple syrup) should be administered into the oral cavity.
• Once hypoglycaemia has been reversed, the patient should have the usual
meal or snack that is due at that time of the day to prevent recurrent
hypoglycaemia.
• Evaluate cause of the hypoglycaemia and educate patient on how to prevent
future episodes.
• Diabetes treatment (OGLDs and insulin) regime may need to be reviewed
and adjusted.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Figure 4-1: Acute management of hypoglycaemia.
Hypoglycaemic patient
(Plasma glucose <3.9 mmol/l)
15 g simple/rapid acting CHO
IV D50% 25 ml-50 ml, OR
IV D20% 75 ml-100 ml, OR
IM Glucagon 1 mg
(if IV line inaccessible)
Eat usual meal due at the time
Evaluate causes of hypoglycaemia
If patient is conscious and able
to self-treat
If patient is unconscious
Monitor plasma glucose
every 15 minutes
Repeat until >3.9 mmol/l
CHO: carbohydrate; IV: intravenous; IM: intramuscular.
Adapted from Kapoor N, et al. Curr Med Issues 2017.475 (Level III)
Hypoglycaemia unawareness
• Hypoglycaemia unawareness occurs when the ability to perceive the
autonomic warning symptoms is either diminished or lost such that the first
sign of hypoglycaemia is confusion or loss of consciousness.40 (Level III)
• Recent or recurrent hypoglycaemia can decrease normal responses to
hypoglycaemia476 (Level II-2) and lead to defective glucose counter-regulation
and hypoglycaemia unawareness.
• Hypoglycaemia unawareness increases the incidence of severe hypoglycaemia
and therefore should trigger re-evaluation of the treatment regimen.477 (Level III)
• Both hypoglycaemia unawareness and defective glucose counter-regulation
are potentially reversible.
• Patients should be advised to temporarily relax their targets.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
• Strict avoidance of hypoglycaemia for 2 days-3 months has been associated
with improvement in the recognition of severe hypoglycaemia, the counterregulatory hormone responses or both.40 (Level III) 478-483 (Level II-2)
Nocturnal hypoglycaemia
• Risk of nocturnal hypoglycaemia is higher especially in the elderly.334 (Level II-3)
• The clinical manifestations may include:40 (Level III) 484,485 (Level II-2)
› poor sleep quality,
› vivid dreams or nightmares,
› waking up with chills or sweating,
› morning headache,
› chronic fatigue,
› mood changes,
› nocturnal convulsions.
• Nocturnal hypoglycaemia may contribute to morning hyperglycaemia.
• Undetected nocturnal hypoglycaemia can promote:
› hypoglycaemia unawareness,
› blunt counterregulatory responses,
› anxiety, reduce quality of life and increase treatment costs.486 (Level II-3)
› negative outcomes such as falls, accidents and arrhythmias.
• To reduce the risk of asymptomatic nocturnal hypoglycaemia, individuals
on basal insulin therapy should periodically monitor early morning (2-5 am,
corresponding with the peak action time of the basal insulin) plasma glucose
levels.40 (Level III)
› Consider switching from human basal insulin to basal insulin analogues
• Patients on SU should readjust dose/consider switching to an OGLD without
hypoglycaemia risk.
Complications of hypoglycaemia
• Hypoglycaemia can cause acute harm to the person with T2DM or others,
especially if it causes falls, motor vehicle accidents, or other accidents.
• A large cohort study suggested that among older adults with T2DM, a history
of severe hypoglycaemia was associated with greater risk of dementia.487 (Level II-3)
• Severe hypoglycaemia was associated with excess mortality in participants
in both the standard and the intensive glycaemia arms of the ACCORD, VADT
and ADVANCE trials.488-491 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
• In people with T2DM and established or very high risk for CVD, there is a clear
association between severe hypoglycaemia and increased mortality.492,493 (Level I)
494(Level II-3)
• Acute hypoglycaemia is proinflammatory, increases platelet activation and
decreases fibrinolysis, leading to a prothrombotic state.495,496 (Level II-2)
• Hypoglycaemia is associated with increased heart rate, SBP, myocardial
contractility, stroke volume and cardiac output, and can induce ST- and
T-wave changes with a lengthening of the QT interval (slower repolarization),
which may increase the risk of arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. 497-499
(Level II-2) 500 (Level II-3) 501 (Level III)
Recommendations: Hypoglycaemia
1. Patients at risk of hypoglycaemia or with high CV
risk should be educated to recognise and prevent
hypoglycaemia.
Grade C
2. Patients on insulin/insulin secretagogues therapy
should periodically monitor early morning glucose to
detect nocturnal hypoglycaemia.
Grade C
3. Patients with hypoglycaemia unawareness and those
with concomitant CVD should relax their glycaemic
targets.
Grade C
4. Hypoglycaemia unawareness should trigger reevaluation of the treatment regimen. Grade C
5. Patients with hypoglycaemia unawareness should
avoid hypoglycaemia for 2 days-3 months to regain
early hypoglycaemia warning symptoms.
Grade B
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
4.2 Diabetic ketoacidosis
• Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is among the most serious acute complications
of T2DM.502
• It has a high mortality rate if unrecognised. The overall mortality is <1%, but
a mortality rate >5% in the elderly has been reported.502
• Mortality in patients with DKA is frequently related to the underlying
aetiological precipitant rather than the metabolic sequelae of hyperglycaemia
or ketoacidosis.502
Principles of management
• Correction of dehydration
• Correction of electrolyte imbalance
• Insulin therapy
• Treatment of precipitating factor
• Prevention of complications
Assessment
• Initial assessment
› History and physical examination
- Look for precipitating causes: infection, missed therapy, non-adherence,
acute coronary syndrome, cerebrovascular accident, surgery and drugs
(e.g. steroids).
› Investigations
- Capillary and venous plasma glucose
- Venous blood gas (pH, bicarbonate)
- Blood or urinary ketones
- BUSE and creatinine
- FBC
- Urinalysis
- If indicated: blood cultures, CXR and ECG
• Diagnostic criteria
› All 3 criteria must be met503 (Level III)
- Capillary plasma glucose >11 mmol/L
- Capillary ketones >3 mmol/L or urine ketones ≥2+
- Venous pH <7.3 and/or bicarbonate <15 mmol/L
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
› Patients with high risk for DKA or severe DKA should be admitted to HDU
or the ICU. High-risk factors include:
- elderly
- pregnancy
- heart and kidney failure
- other serious co-morbidities
• Clinical parameters for severe DKA
› Venous bicarbonate <5 mmol/L
› Plasma ketones >6 mmol/L
› Venous pH <7.1
› Hypokalaemia on admission (<3.5 mmol/L)
› GCS <12
› Oxygen saturation <92% on air (via arterial blood gases [ABG])
› Systolic BP <90 mmHg
› Pulse >100 beats/minute
› Anion gap >16 (Anion gap = [Na+ + K+] – [Cl- + HCO3
-])*
* Na+: sodium; K+: potassium; Cl- : chloride; HCO3- : bicarbonate
Treatment
• Aims of treatment
› Rate of fall of ketones of at least 0.5 mmol/L/hr, OR
› Bicarbonate rise of 3 mmol/L/hr, AND
› Plasma glucose fall of at least 3 mmol/L/hr, AND
› Maintain serum potassium within normal range.
• Precaution during treatment
› Avoid over-correction of hyperglycaemia (within the first 12-24 hours of
treatment, avoid lowering glucose to <14.0 mmol/L)
A. Immediate treatment
• Correction of dehydration
› Fluid deficits in DKA may be up to 10% of total body weight. Restoration of
circulating volume is a priority.502
› SBP on admission <90 mmHg (likely due to low circulating volume,
but consider other causes such as heart failure or sepsis). 503 (Level III) Start
administration of fluid as shown in Table 4-3.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Table 4-3: Correction of dehydration in DKA with admission SBP <90 mmHg.
SBP status Action
SBP <90 mmHg
Remains <90 mmHg
If fails to pick up
Give 500 ml of 0.9% saline solution over 10-15
minutes.
Repeat the above
Consider colloids e.g. Gelafundin
SBP >90 mmHg Give 1000 ml of 0.9% normal saline over the next
60 minutes.
Addition of potassium is likely to be required in the second litre of fluid, especially if baseline potassium is
<5 mmol/L, and aim to maintain levels between 4-5 mmol/L.
› SBP on admission is ≥90 mmHg,503 (Level III) start administration of fluid as
shown in Table 4-4.
Table 4-4: Correction of dehydration in DKA with admission SBP ≥90 mmHg.
Hours from
admission Action
First 1 hour Start IV fluid 1L of 0.9% saline
Continue fluid replacement via infusion pump
depending on hydration status
Over next 2 hours
Over next 4 hours
Over next 6-8 hours
1000 ml of 0.9% saline with potassium chloride (KCl)
1000 ml of 0.9% saline with KCl
1000 ml of 0.9% saline with KCl
› The rate of hydration should be guided by:
- haemodynamic status,
- state of hydration,
- serum electrolyte levels; and
- urinary output.
› More cautious fluid replacement in:**
- young people <18 years
- elderly
- pregnancy
- existing heart or renal failure
** In the above instances, consider HDU admission and, insertion and monitoring via central line.
• Potassium replacement
› Aim to maintain serum potassium between 4-5 mmol/L.
› Withhold K+ replacement if there is no urine output.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Table 4-5: Potassium replacement of infusion solution.
Potassium level (mmol/L) Potassium replacement of infusion solution
>5.5 Nil
3.5-5.5 20-30 mmol KCl/l*
<3.5 additional K+ replacement required**
*1 g KCl = 13.4 mmol K+; ** Maximum potassium replacement per hour is 40 mmol/h.
• Insulin
› Start a fixed rate IV insulin infusion (FRIII): 0.1 unit/kg/hr based on estimate
of weight.503 (Level III)
› 50 units short-acting human insulin or rapid-acting insulin analogue 504 (Level
II-2) made up to 50 ml with 0.9% saline solution.
› Delay insulin infusion if the initial potassium <3.5 mmol/L until serum
potassium is corrected.
› Basal insulin – may consider continuing patient’s SC long-acting analogue/
human insulin while on IV insulin infusion.505,506 (Level II-1)
› Monitor capillary glucose hourly – if the glucose does not fall by at least 3
mmol/L/hr in the first 2-3 hours despite adequate hydration, increase FRIII
by 1 U/hr.
› Once plasma glucose falls below 14 mmol/L: 503(Level III)
- add or switch to 5% dextrose and reduce insulin infusion rate by 50%,
- in the presence of persistent ketonaemia, consider maintaining insulin
infusion rate and changing to 10% dextrose.
› Beyond 24 hours, maintain plasma glucose at 8-12 mmol/L.503 (Level III)
• IV bicarbonate
› The use of IV HCO3
- is not indicated to correct acidosis in DKA due to:
- rise of partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO 2) in cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) which may lead to a paradoxical increase in CSF acidosis,
- delay in the fall of plasma lactate and ketone level; and
- risk of cerebral oedema especially in younger age group.
› While evidence is lacking, IV HCO3
- may be considered if pH is persistently
<6.9 despite adequate hydration and insulin treatment.502 (Level III)
- E.g. 1 ampoule (50 ml) 8.4% NaHCO 3 added to 200 ml D5% over 1 hr,
repeated every 1-2 hours, until pH is ≥7.0. 502 (Level III) Each ml of 8.4%
NaHCO3 solution contains 84.0 mg NaHCO3 (e.g. 1.0 mmol/ml).
• Phosphate
› No evidence to support routine phosphate replacement for DKA.502 (Level III)
› If levels <0.32 mmol/L in the presence of cardiac dysfunction or respiratory
depression, consider phosphate replacement.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
B. Monitoring
• Hourly capillary plasma glucose until it reaches maintenance level of 8 mmol/L12 mmol/L, then monitor 2-4 hourly.
• Vital signs and input-output charting hourly
• Venous HCO3
- and K+ at 60 minutes, 4 hours and 6-hourly thereafter
• 6-hourly BUSE and blood/urine ketones
• If ketones and glucose are not falling as expected, check if the insulin infusion
pump is working and connected, and the correct insulin residual volume is
present.
• If equipment is working but response to treatment inadequate, increase
insulin infusion rate by 1 U/hr increments hourly until targets are achieved.
C. Resolution
• Continue IV insulin infusion until resolution of DKA
• Resolution is defined as:505 (Level III)
› pH >7.3
› Plasma ketone <0.6 mmol/L
D. Transitioning from IV insulin to SC basal bolus insulin
• Patient should be eating and drinking, and back on normal insulin.505 (Level III)
• Overlap the SC insulin with the insulin infusion for ½ hour (for insulin
analogues) or 1 hour (for human insulin).
• Calculating a basal bolus regimen (4 times daily)503 (Level III)
› Current practice is shifting away from estimating total daily dose (TDD) of
SC insulin based on the last 12-24-hour-insulin administered.507 (Level III)
› Estimate total daily dose (TDD) of insulin by multiplying the patient’s
weight (in kg) by 0.5 U-0.75 U.
› Use 0.75 U/kg for those considered to be more insulin resistant e.g. obese
and/or presence of acanthosis nigricans.
› Give 50% of TDD at bedtime in the form of long acting insulin and divide
remaining dose equally between pre-breakfast, pre-lunch and pre-dinner
meals.
• For patients already on insulin before admission, consider resuming previous
insulin regimen and adjust dose as needed.
• Monitor and adjust insulin doses accordingly.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Figure 4-2: Algorithm for management of T2DM with DKA.
IV: intravenous; NaCl: sodium chloride; Na+:
sodium; D5%: dextrose 5%; FRIII: fixed rate
IV insulin infusion; SC: subcutaneous; K +:
potassium; KCl: potassium chloride; BUSE:
blood urea and serum electrolytes; VBG:
venous blood gas.
Adapted from Umpierrez GE, et al. Diabetes
Spectrum 2002. 508 (Level II-2)
IV fluids Insulin Potassium Bicarbonate
Evaluate systolic BP
<90 mmHg
≥90 mmHg
• 500 ml 0.9%
NaCl over
10-15 mins
• If remains
<90 mmHg,
repeat
• If persistent
consider
colloids
FRIII 0.1 U/kg/hr
≥90 mmHg
• 1 litre 0.9%
NaCl over 1 hr
• 0.9% NaCl +
KCl at 1 litre
over 2 hrs,
then next
4 hrs and
next 6-8 hrs
depending
on hydration
status
• Monitor capillary
glucose hourly until
levels reach 8-12
mmol/L, then 2-4
hourly
• If glucose does not
fall by 3 mmol/L/hr
for 1st 2-3hrs despite
adequate hydration,
increase FRIII by 1 U/hr
• If glucose <14 mmol/l,
reduce FRIII by
50% and switch to
dextrose drip
• Maintain glucose
8-12 mmol/L
Transition to SC insulin
when patient is alert
and able to eat
Check BUSE, creatinine, glucose, VBG every 2-4 hours until stable.
Continue insulin infusion for ½ hr (for insulin analogues) or 1 hr (for
human insulin) after SC insulin to prevent rebound hyperglycaemia
Use SC basal bolus regime
pH ≥6.9
No
bicarbonate
Evaluate
serum K+
K+ <3.5
mmol/L
• Delay
initiation of
insulin and
give 20-40
mmol/L KCl
until K+ ≥3.5
mmol/L
• Maximum K+
replacement
is 40 mmol/hr
(3g KCl/hr)
K+ ≥3.5 but
≤5.5 mmol/L
• Add 20-30
mmol/L KCl
in each litre
of IV fluid
• Maintain
serum
K+ at 4-5
mmol/L
K+ >5.5
mmol/L
pH persistently
<6.9
Add 50 ml 8.4%
NaHCO3 to 200
ml D5% over 1
hr, repeat every
1-2 hours, until
pH is ≥7.0
When capillary glucose <14 mmol/L
Switch/add concurrent D5%
Check serum
K+ 2 hourly
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
4.3 Euglycaemic ketoacidosis
• Approximately 10% of patients with DKA present with near-normal glycaemic
values.509
• The current definition for euglycaemic ketoacidosis is plasma glucose level
<11.0 mmol/L.510,511 (Level III)
• Euglycaemic ketoacidosis has been described in T1DM509 and in pregnancy.512,513
• Recently there has been an increasing number of cases of euglycaemic
ketoacidosis associated with the use of SGL T2-i for treatment of T2DM.514 (Level II-2)
› Hence, a normal or mildly elevated plasma glucose does not rule out DKA
in pregnancy or with SGL T2 inhibitor use.
› The documented precipitating factors in patients on SGL T2-i include
acute illnesses (such as infection), recent major surgery and insulin dose
reduction or omission.515 (Level I) 516 (Level II-2)
• Clinical presentation is similar to ketoacidosis. Although the definition states
that random plasma glucose is <11.0 mmol/L, most patients’ plasma glucose
are elevated to >11.0 mmol/L but, lower than levels associated with DKA
(~15 mmol/L-17 mmol/L).
› A high index of suspicion is required for its timely diagnosis because of the
absence of very high glucose levels as seen classically in patients with DKA.
› When patients present (whether at outpatient clinics/emergency wards or
as in-patients),
- where there has been poor oral intake/prolonged fasting e.g. during
Ramadan/have an acute illness/are post-operative,
- check for a history of taking SGL T2-i,
- make it a routine to check for ketones (urine/blood) and if necessary,
blood gas and anion gap – to prevent delay in making a timely diagnosis
and institute appropriate emergency management.
• Treatment should follow standard DKA management protocol except
dehydration is corrected with 5% dextrose saline or 5% dextrose.509 (Level III)
› When the plasma glucose is low in the absence of clinical dehydration, 10%
dextrose may be required.
• SGL T2-i should be withheld and restarted when ketoacidosis resolves and
patient is tolerating oral food intake. 511 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
4.4 Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state (HHS)
• Hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) is a life-threatening emergency
and should be suspected in patients with T2DM who are very ill with
significant hyperglycaemia.
• Can be an initial presentation of undiagnosed T2DM (7-17%).
• Diagnosis of HHS must be prompt and managed intensively in HDU or
equivalent level of care.517 (Level III)
• The elderly with multiple co-morbidities are prone to HHS.518,519 (Level II-3)
• It has a higher mortality than DKA and vascular complications such as MI,
stroke or peripheral arterial thrombosis are common.518-521 (Level II-3)
› Well-described complications such as seizures, cerebral oedema and
osmotic demyelination syndrome though uncommon 522 (Level III) can occur
due to rapid changes in osmolality during treatment.523 (Level III)
• Whilst the presentation of DKA is rapid (within hours), HHS progresses over
many days. As a result, the dehydration and metabolic disturbances are
more profound.524 (Level III)
Diagnostic criteria517 (Level III)
• Severe dehydration
• Marked hyperglycaemia (plasma glucose >30 mmol/L)
• Serum osmolality >320 mosmol/kg
› Effective serum osmolality = 2 (Na2+) [mmol/L] + glucose [mmol/]
› In severe hyperglycaemia, measured serum Na 2+ is falsely low i.e.
pseudohyponatremia. Recognition of pseudohyponatraemia is important
to avoid use of hypertonic saline during fluid management.
› Urea levels are not used for calculation of osmolality, as it passes freely
across the plasma membranes and its accumulation does not induce an
osmotic gradient across cell membranes.525
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Other important clinical features517 (Level III)
• There is no significant ketonaemia (<3.0 mmol/L) or acidosis (pH >7.3, HCO 3
-
>15 mmol/L).
• When significant acidosis is present, a mixed picture of HHS and DKA should
be considered. However, other causes of acidosis (such as lactic acidosis,
sepsis and poisoning) should be excluded.
• If there is worsening of acute cognitive impairment, consider:
› cerebral oedema in severe cases or the presence of significant electrolyte
disturbances,
› hyperosmolality (>330 mosmol/kg),
› sudden drop in osmolality,
› severe dehydration, infection and sepsis,
› hypoglycaemia during treatment; and
› renal failure.
• Precipitating factors for HHS526,527 (Level III)
› Infection (30-60%)
› Poor adherence to treatment – omission of insulin or OGLDs
› Presence of acute concomitant illness – cerebrovascular events, myocardial
infarction
› Medication – diuretics, glucocorticoids or antipsychotic drugs
Management goals
• The treatment goals of HHS are to treat the underlying cause as well as
gradual and safe:
› correction of dehydration,
› correction of electrolyte imbalance,
› control of hyperglycaemia,
› treatment of precipitating factors,
› prevention of complications.
Principles of treatment
• IV 0.9% saline solution is the principle fluid to restore circulating volume and
correction of dehydration.
• IV 0.45% saline solution is used if serum Na 2+ is >145 mmol/L or the serum
osmolality is not declining (<3 mosm/kg) despite adequate hydration.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
• Recognition of pseudohyponatraemia in severe hyperglycaemia is important
as to avoid using hypertonic saline.
• Most algorithms 6,40 recommend use of corrected Na 2+ after restoring
circulatory volume, however, in general use of measured Na 2+ is acceptable
to guide decision on fluid management.
• In the presence of heart failure and renal failure, cautious fluid replacement
is advised.
• Aim for gradual reduction in serum osmolality at the rate of 3-8 mosm/kg/hr.
• An initial rise in Na2+ is expected and is not in itself an indication for hypotonic
fluids. Thereafter, the rate of fall of plasma Na2+ should not exceed 10 mmol/L
in 24 hours.
• Too rapid fall in glucose should be avoided.
› Aim for a reduction in blood glucose of 4-6 mmol/L/hr.505 (Level III)
• Prophylactic low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is recommended unless
contraindicated.
• Identify and treat the precipitating cause.
• Resolution of HHS is when the patient is alert, eating well, serum osmolality
<320 mosm/kg and plasma glucose level <14 mmol/L.502,527 (Level III)
• Once HHS resolves, transition from IV insulin to SC basal bolus insulin.
However, patients with HHS are more insulin sensitive and may require lower
insulin dose.
• To reduce the risk of recurrence and prevent long-term complications,
discharge planning should include:
› diabetes education,
› dietitian referral,
› education on medications including insulin administration, if required.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Figure 4-3: Algorithm for management of T2DM with HHS.
IV: intravenous; NaCl: sodium chloride; Na +: sodium; D5%: dextrose 5%; FRIII: fixed rate IV insulin infusion; SC: subcutaneous; K +: potassium; BUSE: blood urea and serum
electrolytes; VBG: venous blood gas.
Adapted from Umpierrez GE, et al. Diabetes Spectrum 2002. 508 (Level II-2)
Insulin
FRIII 0.05 U/kg/hr
• Monitor capillary glucose
hourly until levels reach
8-12 mmol/L, then 2-4
hourly
• If glucose does not fall
by 3 mmol/L/hr for 2-3
hrs despite adequate
hydration, increase FRIII
by 1 U/hr
• If glucose <14 mmol/L,
reduce FRIII to 0.05 U/kg/
hr and switch to dextrose
drip
• Maintain glucose
8-12 mmol
Transition to SC insulin
when patient is alert and
able to eat
IV fluids
• Administer 0.9% NaCl: 1 L
during first 1-2 hours.
• Reassess hydration status
Evaluate serum Na+
0.45% NaCl at
250-500 ml/hr
depending on
hydration status
When capillary glucose <14 mmol/L
Switch/add concurrent D5%
0.9% NaCl at
250-500 ml/hr depending
on hydration status
High
(>145 mmol/L) Normal Low
Potassium
Evaluate
serum K+
K+ <3.5
mmol/L
• Delay initiation of
insulin and give
20-40 mmol/L
KCl until K+ ≥3.5
mmol/L
• Maximum K+
replacement is
40 mmol/hr
(3g KCl/hr)
K+ ≥3.5 but
≤5.5 mmol/L
• Add 20-30
mmol/L KCl
in each litre
of IV fluid
• Maintain
serum K+ at
4-5 mmol/L
K+ >5.5
mmol/L
Check serum
K+ 2 hourly
Give prophylactic low molecular weight
heparin (LMWH) if no contraindication
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC METABOLIC EMERGENCIES
Recommendations: DKA and HHS
1. Prompt recognition and institution of treatment are
important to avoid complications. Grade C
2. Severe DKA and HHS should be managed in a highdependency or intensive care unit. Grade C
3. Patients must be educated on precipitating factors to
avoid DKA or HHS. Grade C
4. Mainstay of treatment includes restoration of
hydration, insulin infusion, correction of electrolytes
imbalance and treatment of precipitating cause.
Grade C
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC
COMPLICATIONS
5.1 Retinopathy
• Prevalence of diabetic retinopathy is closely linked to duration of diabetes
and level of glycaemic control.528 (Level II-2) 529 (Level I)
• Other factors that increase risk of retinopathy include hypertension and
nephropathy.530 (Level II-3) 531 (Level II-2)
• At diagnosis, less than 5% will have retinopathy while the prevalence rises to
40-50% after 10 years. About 60% patients with T2DM have some degree of
retinopathy after 20 years of the disease.532 (Level III)
• Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness among adults in
developed countries.
› In Malaysia, the prevalence of diabetic retinopathy from the 2007 Diabetes
Eye Registry was 36.8%.533 (Level III)
› More recently, a prevalence of retinopathy in ambulatory outpatients with
T2DM of 15% and 39.3% was found in Klang Valley and Kelantan tertiary
care centres respectively.534,535
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) therapy has
emerged as the treatment of choice in centre-involving diabetic
macular oedema, shown to be superior to laser photocoagulation in
improving vision.
• Rapid improvement of glycaemia in patients with established
retinopathy may be associated with transient worsening of
retinopathy. Co-management with an ophthalmologist and a more
gradual improvement of glycaemia is advised.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Screening
• Screening and early treatment can prevent substantial visual loss in many
cases.536 (Level II-3) 537 (Level II-2)
• Screening should include:
› visual acuity assessment using Snellen or equivalent chart with pinhole
correction,
› a non-mydriatic fundus camera photography as a part of a telemedicine
program with remote review by credentialled personnel.538,539 (Level III)
• In general, eye examinations are repeated every 1-2 years in those with
minimal-to-no retinopathy.536 (Level II-3) 537 (Level II-2)
Eye examination
• Ideally at the time of diagnosis of T2DM and preferably performed by an
ophthalmologist.540 (Level I)
• Should include:
› visual acuity assessment using Snellen or equivalent chart with pinhole
correction, and
› complete anterior segment and dilated fundus examination.
In low-/intermediate resource settings, screening should include visual acuity
assessment and retinal examination for adequate Diabetic Retinopathy
Classification by trained/credentialled personnel.538 (Level III)
Management
A. Delay onset and progression
• Glucose
› Intensive glucose-lowering has been shown to prevent and/or delay onset
and progression of retinopathy in T2DM.401, 541,542 (Level I)
› In situations where rapid control of glucose is expected in patients with preexisting diabetic retinopathy there is a potential for transient worsening
of retinopathy hence, referral for detailed ophthalmological assessment is
required.259,260,543 (Level I) 544-546 (Level II)
- If diabetic retinopathy is documented, care should be taken when
improving glycaemic control and patients need to be counselled regarding
the likelihood of transient worsening of retinopathy.
• Blood pressure
› Lowering blood pressure (BP) decreases retinopathy progression,
although lowering BP intensively (systolic BP <120 mmHg) does not impart
additional benefit.401,547,548 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Fenofibrate use
› Retinopathy progression may be slowed by addition of fenofibrate
particularly in those with non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy
(NPDR).400,401 (Level I)
› This holds true irrespective of baseline dyslipidaemia status.
• Aspirin use
› The presence of retinopathy is not a contraindication to aspirin therapy for
cardiovascular disease prevention, as this therapy does not increase the
risk of retinal bleeding.549 (Level I)
B. Treatment
• Photocoagulation therapy
› Laser photocoagulation remains the standard practice for treating diabetic
retinopathy. Laser therapy is indicated for severe NPDR and proliferative
diabetic retinopathy.550 (Level I)
› Laser therapy is only relatively indicated in certain types of diabetic
macular oedema.551 (Level III)
• Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF)
› Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays an important role in
diabetic retinopathy, particularly in the development of diabetic macular
oedema.
› Anti-VEGF therapy is superior to laser photocoagulation, 552 (Level I) improves
vision and is the treatment of choice in centre-involving diabetic macular
oedema.553 (Level I)
› Potential adverse effects of anti-VEGFs include transient increases in
intraocular pressure and injection-related infectious endophthalmitis.554 (Level I)
› Non-ocular adverse events reported include cerebrovascular accidents and
MI. However systematic reviews have not found a statistically significant
association.552 (Level I)
Referral to ophthalmologist
• Referral to an ophthalmologist is necessary for the following situations
(Refer Table 5-1):
› severe NPDR,
› any level of diabetic maculopathy,
› any proliferative diabetic retinopathy,
› unexplained visual loss,
› if screening examination cannot be performed, or ungradeable fundus
photo is used.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Table 5-1: Recommended follow-up and referral schedule for diabetic
retinopathy.
Stage of retinopathy Follow-up
No DR 12-24 months
Mild NPDR without maculopathy 9-12 months
Moderate NPDR without maculopathy 6 months
Mild/moderate NPDR with maculopathy
Refer ophthalmologistSevere NPDR without maculopathy
Any maculopathy
Proliferative DR Refer urgently to
ophthalmologistAdvanced diabetic eye disease (ADED)
DR: diabetic retinopathy; NPDR: non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Colours indicate progressive
urgency for referrals (Refer Table 5-2 for criteria for urgent referrals).
Adapted from Malaysian CPG for Screening of Diabetic Retinopathy, 2011.539 (Level III)
Table 5-2: Criteria for urgent referral.
Urgency of referral Ocular features
Emergency (same day referral)
• Sudden severe visual loss
• Symptoms or signs of acute retinal
detachment
Appointment within 1 week
• Presence of retinal new vessels
• Preretinal haemorrhage
• Vitreous haemorrhage
• Rubeosis iridis
Appointment within 4 weeks
• Unexplained drop in visual acuity
• Any form of maculopathy
• Severe NPDR
• Worsening retinopathy
NPDR: non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
Adapted from Malaysian CPG for Screening of Diabetic Retinopathy, 2011.539 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Retinopathy
1. Improving glycaemic control and optimising BP
reduces risk of development and progression of
retinopathy.
Grade A
5. Pan-retinal laser photocoagulation is indicated to
reduce visual loss in high risk proliferative diabetic
retinopathy and in some cases, severe nonproliferative retinopathy.
Grade C
2. In T2DM, screening and evaluation for retinopathy is
indicated at the time of diagnosis. Grade B
3. The interval for follow-up assessment should be
decided based on severity of retinopathy. Grade C
4. In those without retinopathy the recommended
interval is 1-2 years.
6. Intra-vitreal anti-VEGF is indicated for sight-threatening
centre-involving diabetic macular oedema.
Grade B
Grade A
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• DKD is a major cause of chronic kidney disease and may be present at
diagnosis of T2DM, and can progress to ESKD.555 (Level II-3)
• It accounted for 65% of new patients requiring dialysis in Malaysia in 2016. 5
(Level II-3)
• DKD markedly increases CV risk and healthcare costs.556 (Level I) 557 (Level II-2)
• Diagnosis is made clinically – based on presence of albuminuria and/or
reduced eGFR in the absence of other causes of kidney disease. 558 (Level III) If
there is concomitant presence of other microvascular complications (e.g.
retinopathy), it is more suggestive that the albuminuria/reduced eGFR is due
to DKD.
• Progression to ESKD requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT) occurs in
many with poorly controlled BP and glucose.
Screening and risk stratification
• Screening should encompass:
› assessment of albuminuria,
› estimation of glomerular filtration rate (eGFR).
• DKD can be present with or without albuminuria, in the presence or absence
of retinopathy.559,560 (Level II-2)
5.2 Diabetic kidney disease (DKD)
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• DKD is the new term used to refer to kidney disease caused by T2DM.
• SGL T2-i have been proven to be renoprotective, beyond glucoselowering.
• SGL T2-i should be considered in patients with albuminuria and DKD
down to eGFR 30 ml/min/1.73 m2, to reduce DKD progression.
• GLP1-RA have been shown to reduce albuminuria progression in
DKD with high CV risk.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
UTI: urinary tract infection; CCF: congestive cardiac failure; DKD: diabetic kidney disease.
Adapted from Malaysian CPG on Management of Chronic Kidney Disease, 2018.561 (Level III)
• A standard urine dipstick test should be performed at diagnosis of T2DM and
annually.561 (Level III)
• A positive dipstick test should be confirmed on two occasions within 3 months.
• Albuminuria should be quantified, if present.
• If dipstick is negative, screen for urine microalbuminuria (first morning
sample or a random sample without excessive water intake). 561 (Level III) If
microalbuminuria is negative, test yearly.
• Moderately increased albuminuria (previously known as microalbuminuria) is
the earliest sign of DKD and predicts increased CV mortality and morbidity
and ESKD.556 (Level I)
Urine dipstick for protein
Negative
Negative
Positive
Overt
nephropathy
Quantify
proteinuria
Screen for
microalbuminuria on
early morning spot
urine
Retest twice in
3-6 months
• Exclude other causes
e.g. UTI, CCF and others
If 2 of 3 tests are
positive, diagnosis of
DKD is established
• Quantify
microalbuminuria
• 3-to-6-monthly followup of microalbuminuria
Yearly test for
microalbuminuria
and renal function
Positive on 2 occasions
(Urine protein >0.3 mg/
mmol)
• Exclude other causes
e.g. UTI, CCF and others.
Check renal function
• Exclude other
nephropathies
• Perform renal
ultrasound scan if
indicated.
A. Assessment of albuminuria
Figure 5-1: Assessment of albuminuria.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• If albuminuria is detected, repeat the test twice in 3-6 months for
confirmation561 (Level III) after excluding other causes such as UTI and CCF. If 2
out of 3 tests are positive, a diagnosis of DKD is established.
• Albuminuria may be affected by variation in urine concentration due to
hydration.
• If microalbuminuria dipstick is positive, it is recommended to do a more
specific test urine albumin- creatinine ratio (UACR). The UACR is not affected
by urine concentration and should be done early morning to minimise effect
of posture and exercise.562 (Level III)
• UACR >3.0 mg/mmol is equivalent to >30 mg protein excretion/24 hours
and should be monitored at least twice yearly (Refer table 5-3 for stratifying
albuminuria status according to ACR/AER).
Table 5-3: Stages of CKD based on albuminuria
Persistent albuminuria categories
A1 A2 A3
Normalto-mildly
increased
Moderately
increased
Severely
increased
<30 mg/g
<3 mg/
mmol
30-300
mg/g
3-30 mg/
mmol
>300 mg/g
>30 mg/
mmol
GFR
categories
(ml/min/
1.73 m2)
G1 Normal or
high ≥90
G2 Mildly
decreased 60-89
G3a
Mildly-tomoderately
decreased
45-59
G3b
Moderatelyto-severely
decreased
30-44
G4 Severely
decreased 15-29
G5 Renal failure <15
Colours indicate prognosis - Green: low risk; Yellow: moderate risk, Orange: high risk, Red and deep red:
very high risk. GFR: glomerular filtration rate.
Adapted from KDIGO 2020 CPG for Diabetes Management in Chronic Kidney Disease. 956 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Screening for DKD
2. Screening for albuminuria should be performed at
diagnosis and annually with a conventional dipstick on
an early morning urine specimen.
Grade C
6. Regardless of the degree of albuminuria, serum
creatinine level should be measured annually to
determine GFR based on the CKD EPI formula.
Grade C
1. DKD should be assessed, risk stratified and managed
based on degree of albuminuria and eGFR. Grade C
3. If urine dipstick for albuminuria is negative, screening
for microalbuminuria should be performed. Grade C
4. If microalbuminuria is detected, confirmation should
be made with a repeat test within 3 to 6 months. Grade C
5. If microalbuminuria is not detected, re-screening should
be performed annually. Grade C
Management
A. General management
• Preventing progression of DKD encompasses:
› BP control,
› glycaemic control,
› RAS blockade,24,373,567-569 (Level I) 355 (Level III)
› SGL T2 inhibition.201,202,209,589,955 (Level I)
• Dose adjustments of GLDs may be necessary with eGFR <60ml/min/1.73 m 2.
(Refer Appendix 7)
• BP control
› BP targets
- BP target in DKD should be <130/80 mmHg regardless of level of
albuminuria.561 (Level III) 570 (Level II-1) 571 (Level II-2)
- SBP should not be <120 mmHg and DBP not <70 mmHg.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
› ACE inhibitors/ARB
- ACE inhibitor or ARB is the preferred first-line agent for BP in DKD
with proven benefit on prevention of DKD progression, via their antiproteinuric effects.372,373,572 (Level I)
- ACE inhibitor or ARB is beneficial in DKD with albuminuria even when BP
is <130/80 mmHg.371,373,561,573-576 (Level I)
- Normalisation of microalbuminuria is associated with a reduction in the
rate of decline of GFR.371 (Level I)
- Urine protein-creatinine ratio (uPCr) or UACR should be used to monitor
treatment response directed against proteinuria. uPCR is preferred in
those with established proteinuria in view of its cost-effectiveness.577 (Level III)
- ACE inhibitor and ARB are similar in terms of benefits and risks.370 (Level I) 578
(Level II-2)
- Renal profile should be reassessed within 2-4 weeks upon initiation or
dose escalation of ACE inhibitor/ARB therapy, especially in patients with
impaired renal function at baseline.
- Consider reducing dose or discontinuing ACE inhibitor/ARB within 2
months upon commencement (after excluding other precipitating factors)
when:561 (Level III)
» serum creatinine levels remain ≥30% from the baseline; or
» eGFR reduces ≥25%; or
» serum potassium ≥5.6 mmol/L.
- ACE inhibitor/ARB should be titrated to the maximum recommended
dose to achieve optimal BP targets and anti-proteinuric effects.561 (Level III)
- The benefits and risks of withholding RAS blockers in advanced DKD are
debatable. There is an ongoing trial to assess this.579 (Level I)
- Combination of ACE inhibitor with ARB should not be used routinely.
This combination showed no added benefit but had higher adverse
effects such as hyperkalaemia and acute kidney injury.580 (Level I) 581 (Level II-1)
› Mineralocorticoid antagonist
- Finerenone, a selective mineralocorticoid antagonist has recently been
shown to reduce DKD progression and CV events in DKD.954 (Level I)
- Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (spironolactone, eplerenone
and finerenone) in combination with ACE inhibitor/ARB are effective for
management of resistant hypertension and have been shown to reduce
albuminuria in short-term studies of DKD, and may have additional CV
benefits.582 (Level I) 583 (Level II-2) 584 (Level II-1) 585 (Level III)
- Careful monitoring for hyperkalaemia is required when used in
combination with ACE inhibitor/ARB.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Glucose lowering
› Metformin
- Metformin remains the first-line glucose-lowering therapy in DKD, unless
eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73m2.586 (Level I)
- Dose reduction of metformin by 50% is required between eGFR 30-59 ml/
min/1.73m2.
› SGL T2-i
- SGL T2-i reduce intraglomerular pressure, albuminuria and slow GFR
decline independent of their glucose and BP lowering effects.587 (Level III) 588
(Level I)
- SGL T2-i reduce the rate of DKD progression in patients up to eGFR 3025 ml/min/1.73 m 2 201,202,209,589,955(Level I) despite lower anti-hyperglycaemic
efficacy.
- Do not initiate at eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73 m2 – but, may continue if already
initiated.209,955 (Level I), 956 (Level III)
- Stop SGL T2-i when patient is initiated on dialysis.956 (Level III)
- Patients with higher degree of albuminuria and advanced DKD benefitted
the most.209 (Level I)
› GLP1-RA
- GLP-1RA can be considered in patients with DKD and high CV risk in
order to reduce albuminuria progression.230,259,590 (Level I)
- Dedicated renal outcome trials with GLP1-RA are ongoing.591
• Protein and salt intake
› Maintain dietary protein at 0.8g/kg body weight/day956 (Level III) in DKD stage
3-5 (not on dialysis) while ensuring adequate energy intake (30-35 kcal/kg/
day).558,561,592 (Level III) 593 (Level I)
› Dietary protein restriction may delay progression of renal impairment.
› Control of dietary potassium is important in those who are at risk of
hyperkalaemia.594 (Level III)
› Salt restriction to <2 g/day (sodium chloride <5 g/day)956(Level III) is recommended
to control BP and reduce CV risk.595 (Level II-1)
B. Other measures
• Lipid control (Refer Sub-section 3.9.2)
• Smoking cessation
• Weight reduction (Refer Sub-section 3.9.3)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Management of DKD
2. BP target should be ≤130/80 mmHg (SBP not <120
mmHg and DBP not <70 mmHg) in DKD regardless of
level of albuminuria.
Grade A
1. Optimise glucose and blood pressure control and use
RAS blockade to slow progression of DKD. Grade A
3. ACEIs or ARBs should be initiated in patients with
albuminuria, regardless of BP, as tolerated. Grade A
5. GLP1-RA should be considered in patients with DKD
and at high CV risk. Grade A
Referral to nephrologist
All patients with T2DM and DKD should be referred to a nephrologist in these
situations:561,565 (Level III)
• rapid decline in renal function (eGFR loss >5 ml/min/1.73 m 2 in 1 year or >10
ml/min/1.73 m2 in 5 years),
• eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73 m2,
• persistent heavy proteinuria (≥1 g/day) despite optimal treatment,
• persistent haematuria with albuminuria (urine protein ≥0.5 g/day),
• other suspected causes apart from DKD (glomerular, genetic or uncertain
cause),
• difficult to manage complications of DKD (anaemia, electrolyte disturbance
including persistent hyperkalaemia, renal bone disease),
• resistant hypertension (failure to control BP despite 3 anti-hypertensive
agents, including a diuretic),
4. SGL T2-i should be considered in patients with
eGFR ≥30ml/min /1.73m2, particularly in those with
albuminuria to reduce risk of DKD progression.
Grade A
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• suspected renal artery stenosis,
• pregnant or planning for pregnancy.
Consultation with a nephrologist at eGFR <30ml/ min/1.73m 2 has been shown
to delay dialysis, improve quality of care and reduce cost. 596 (Level III) The reason
for limiting referral to this eGFR is for purely logistical concerns. It is important
for primary care and general physicians to jointly manage patients with
nephrologists.
5.3 Neuropathy
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• CV autonomic neuropathy is an independent risk factor for CV
mortality.
• The diabetic peripheral neuropathies (DPN) are heterogeneous with diverse
clinical manifestations. They may be diffuse or focal.597
• Diffuse neuropathies are:597
› distal symmetric polyneuropathy (DSPN), and
› diabetic autonomic neuropathy (DAN) particularly CV autonomic
neuropathy.
• Focal neuropathies include:597
› mononeuritis, and
› radiculopathies.
Diabetic symmetric polyneuropathy (DSPN)
• The likelihood of having DSPN is higher in the presence of:598
› neuropathic symptoms,
› absent or decreased ankle reflex,
› decreased distal sensation,
› distal muscle weakness or atrophy, and
› abnormal nerve conduction study.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
A. Screening and diagnosis
• DSPN should be assessed with a 10-g monofilament (starting from the
dorsum of hallux, then moving proximally); and one other modality:
› pin prick,
› vibration sense using a 128-Hz tuning fork,
› ankle reflexes; or
› vibration perception threshold testing using a biothesiometer.
These increase the sensitivity of detecting DSPN by 87%.599-602 (Level II-3)
• These bedside tests should be performed at least annually.597 (Level III)
• Consider screening for people with prediabetes/T2DM who have symptoms
of peripheral neuropathy.
• In most cases, DSPN can be diagnosed clinically and electrophysiological
tests are rarely required. Electrophysiological tests can be considered if
there are atypical features:597 (Level III)
› rapid onset or progression of neuropathy,
› asymmetrical neuropathy,
› predominantly motor neuropathy,
› if other causes are considered; or
› in cases of diagnostic uncertainty.
• Symptoms of neuropathic pain include:603
› burning pain,
› painful cold, electric shock-like pain
› tingling pain, or
› sensation of pins and needles, and
› may be associated with paraesthesia, dysesthesia, or allodynia.
• Validated questionnaires are available to assess for neuropathic pain due to
DSPN. However, these are for screening rather than diagnosis and include:
› painDETECT 604
› DN4 605
› LANSS Pain Scale606
› ID pain607 (Refer Malaysian Association for the Study of Pain’s Management
of Neuropathic Pain (2nd edition), 2012. Available at: http://www.masp.org.
my/index.cfm?menuid=21)
Of the above, DN4 and ID pain are simple and feasible for use in clinical practice,
whilst LANSS Pain Scale and painDetect is more detailed and more frequently
used for research purposes.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
B. Management
• Intensive lifestyle intervention
› In T2DM, reduces the risk of DSPN.608 (Level II-1)
› In prediabetes, reduces the risk of DSPN especially in the subgroup that
did not progress to T2DM.609 (Level II-2)
• Intensive glycaemic control has been shown to have a modest effect on
reducing the risk of DSPN in people with T2DM.610 (Level II-1)
• No pharmacologic therapy has been shown to be effective in treating DSPN.
However, there are drugs approved for pain associated with DSPN (Refer
Table 5-4).
• Combination therapy of 2 medications may be more effective than higher
doses of either medication as monotherapy.611 (Level I)
• Tricyclic antidepressants carry a higher risk of sedation and/or orthostatic
hypotension and should be used with caution in older people at risk of
falls.612 (Level II-1)
• Opioids carry a high risk of sedation, dependence, and other side-effects,
hence should only be used in combination with other agents, instead of as
first-line treatment for pain due to DSPN.
› The efficacy of tramadol is likely due to its serotonin and noradrenaline
uptake blocking effect.
• Consider referring patients to pain specialists (if available), in particular if
they require long-term opioid treatment.597 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Table 5-4: Drugs approved for painful DSPN.
Class of drugs Generic name Adverse events Issues
Dose in renal
impairment613 (Level III)
Voltage-gated
calcium channel
α2-δ
subunit ligand
Pregabalin614-616 Level I)
Initial dose: 75mg OD or BD
Effective dose: 150-300 mg BD
Max dose: 600 mg/day in
divided doses
Somnolence, dizziness,
ataxia, seizure upon
rapid withdrawal
• Pregabalin requires
2 weeks to achieve
maximum efficacy,
regular dosing is
required during
titration phase
eGFR 15-30: 25-150 mg/
day in 1-2 divided doses
eGFR <15: 25-75 mg OD
Gabapentin617 (Level I)
Initial dose: 100-300 mg ODto-TDS
Effective dose:
900-3600 mg/day
Max dose: 3600 mg/day in
divided dose
• Efficacy of gabapentin
at lower-tointermediate dose
is variable and often
require higher dose
eGFR 30-50: 300-900 mg/
day in 3 divided doses
eGFR 15-29: 300-600 mg/
day in 3 divided doses
eGFR <15: 100-300 mg
OD618 (Level III)
Serotoninnorepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor
Duloxetine619-621 (Level I)
Initial dose: 30 mg OD
Effective dose: 60-120 mg OD
Max dose: 120 mg OD
Nausea, somnolence,
dizziness, dry
mouth, constipation,
hyponatremia,
arrhythmia, seizures,
serotonin syndrome
None
Consider lower starting
dose and slow titration
eGFR <30: Not
recommended
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Tricyclic
antidepressant
Amitriptyline622-624 (Level I)
Initial dose: 10-25 mg OD
Effective dose: 25-100 mg/day
Max dose: 150 mg/day
Somnolence, dizziness,
insomnia, dry
mouth, orthostatic
hypotension, urinary
retention, constipation,
hyponatremia,
arrhythmias, seizures,
neuroleptic malignant
syndrome
Side-effects of tricyclic
antidepressants increase
the risk of falls in older
people.
No dose reduction but,
increased likelihood
of anticholinergic
adverse events (blurred
vision, dry mouth and
constipation)
Opioid
Tapentadol625,626 (Level I)
Initial dose: 50 mg BD
Effective dose: 50 mg BD
Max 500 mg/day Somnolence, dizziness
nausea, vomiting,
constipation, respiratory
depression, serotonin
syndrome
Long-term use of
opioid is associated
with tolerance and
dependence.
Avoid use or reduce dose
as effects of opioids are
increased and prolonged
due to increased
cerebral sensitivity in
renal impairment
• Tramadol and
Oxycodone: As above
• Tapentadol: No
dose adjustment in
mild-moderate renal
impairment. Avoid in
severe impairment
Tramadol627 (Level I)
Initial dose: 50 mg OD-to-BD
Effective dose: 100-200 mg/day
Max dose: 400 mg/day
Oxycodone628 (Level I)
Initial dose: 5-10 mg BD
Drugs approved for DSPN according to class preference.
eGFR is in mL/min/1.73 m2
DSPN: diabetic symmetric polyneuropathy, OD: daily; BD: twice daily; TDS: three times daily; FDA: United States Food and Drug Administration.
Adapted from Pop-Busui, et al. 2017;597 (Level I) Bril V, et al. 2018;629 (level III) British National Formulary, 2015.613 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy (DAN)
• Diabetic autonomic neuropathy (DAN) causes CV, GI, urogenital, and
pseudomotor dysfunctions, as well as hypoglycaemia unawareness and
abnormal pupillary function (Refer Table 5-5).597
• Of clinical relevance, cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (CAN) is an
independent risk factor for cardiovascular mortality.597,630 (Level I)
A. Symptoms and diagnosis
Table 5-5: Symptoms of DAN.
CAN GI Urogenital Sudomotor
Resting
tachycardia
Abnormal
blood pressure
regulation
• Non-dipping
• Reverse dipping
Orthostatic
hypotension
• Lightheadedness
• Weakness
• Faintness
• Visual
impairment
• Syncope
Orthostatic
tachycardia or
bradycardia and
chronotropic
incompetence
• Lightheadedness
• Weakness
• Faintness
• Dizziness
• Visual
impairment
• Syncope
Exercise
intolerance
Gastroparesis
• Nausea
• Bloating
• Loss of appetite
• Early satiety
• Postprandial
vomiting
• Brittle diabetes
Oesophageal
dysfunction
• Heartburn
• Dysphagia for
solids
Diabetic diarrhoea
• Profuse and
watery diarrhoea
• Faecal
incontinence
• May alternate
with
constipation
Constipation
• May alternate
with explosive
diarrhoea
Bladder
dysfunction
• Frequency
• Urgency
• Nocturia
• Hesitancy
• Weak stream
• Dribbling
• Urinary
incontinence
• Urinary
retention
Male sexual
dysfunction
• Erectile
dysfunction
• Decreased libido
• Abnormal
ejaculation
Female sexual
dysfunction
• Decreased
sexual desire
• Increased
pain during
intercourse
• Decreased
sexual arousal
• Inadequate
lubrication
Dry skin
• Anhidrosis
• Gustatory
sweating
CAN: cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy; GI: gastrointestinal.
Adapted from Pop-Busui et al. Diabetes Care, 2017.597
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Diagnosis of CAN
› Use of standardised CV autonomic reflex tests (CART) is recommended for
diagnosis.
› Commonly utilised tests are postural BP, heart rate (HR) variability upon
standing and deep breathing at 6 breaths/min.
› The presence of 2 or more abnormal CART results is generally accepted as
diagnostic.
› The presence of abnormal CART with orthostatic hypotension (>20/10 mmHg
drop) identifies severe or advanced CAN.630 (Level III)
› Precautions prior to testing:630 (Level III)
- optimise plasma glucose, and
- avoid caffeine intake, smoking, or alcohol for at least 2 hours prior, and
- avoid performing test within 2 hours after a main meal or prandial insulin
injection.
› Use age-appropriate CART reference values when available.
• Diagnosis of gastroparesis
› By: 631 (Level III)
- a combination of symptoms (Refer Table 5-5),
- demonstration of delayed gastric emptying time; and
- exclusion of gastric outlet obstruction or ulceration.
› The gold-standard test to diagnose gastroparesis is gastric emptying
scintigraphy.
B. Management
• Intensive control of modifiable CV risk factors have been shown to reduce the
progression and development of CAN among patients with T2DM.632 (Level I)
• Avoid/minimise drugs that cause orthostatic hypotension.
› Midodrine has been approved as medical therapy for orthostatic
hypotension.6 (Level III)
› Other recommended interventions include acute water ingestion for
short-term relief, physical counter-pressure manoeuvres, compression
garments, fludrocortisone, and increasing salt and water intake.633 (Level III)
• Exercise programs and multifactorial interventions for fall prevention has
been shown to reduce the risk of falls in older people at moderate and high
risk.634 (Level III)
› Consider referral to centres specialising in fall prevention (if available).
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Small frequent meals with low fat and fibre content are recommended in
gastroparesis.631,635 (Level III)
• Prokinetic agents such as erythromycin aids in relieving gastroparetic
symptoms but may be limited by tachyphylaxis.636 (Level III)
• Short-term metoclopramide may be used in severe cases.6 (Level III)
› Long-term use of metoclopramide may be complicated by neuromuscular
complications, e.g. tardive dyskinesia and extrapyramidal side-effects.637
› Alternatively, domperidone acts similarly to metoclopramide, but with less
neurological side-effects due to reduced penetration across the bloodbrain barrier.638 (Level III)
Diabetic amyotrophy
• Diabetic amyotrophy, also known as proximal diabetic neuropathy, diabetic
lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy, or Bruns-Garland syndrome is an
uncommon subtype of diabetic neuropathy affecting about 0.8% to 1% of
people with diabetes.639 (Level II-2) 640 (Level III)
• It Is characterised by weakness and areflexia of asymmetric onset, pain on
the affected site and marked weight loss.641 (Level III)
A. Diagnosis
• Is made by excluding nerve root compression with MRI.
• Supported by the presence of small amplitude sensory nerve action potential
from nerve conduction studies, and fibrillation potentials and long duration
high amplitude motor unit action potential from electromyogram.641 (Level III)
B. Management
• Treatment of pain due to diabetic amyotrophy follows similar recommendation
for treatment for pain due to DSPN.597 (Level III)
• Data on the effect of glycaemic control on diabetic amyotrophy Is lacking.
However, given the known benefits on preventing neuropathy and other
diabetic complications, glucose control should be optimized.641,642 (Level III)
• Diabetic amyotrophy progresses over months, and eventually stabilises and
improves.643 (Level II-2)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Neuropathy
2. Intensive lifestyle intervention has been shown to
reduce the risk of diabetic peripheral neuropathy in
people with prediabetes and T2DM.
Grade B
3. Tight control of plasma glucose and CV risk factors
have been shown to reduce the progression and
development of autonomic neuropathy.
Grade B
1. Assessment for peripheral neuropathy should be
performed at diagnosis and annually. Grade C
5. Refer patients to specialised pain centres if they
require long-term opioid treatment. Grade C
4. Treatment for pain due to DSPN include voltage-gated
calcium channel α2-δ ligand (pregabalin, gabapentin),
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor
(duloxetine), or tricyclic antidepressants. Switching to
another class of medication or combination therapy
may be required if patients have poor response to the
initial treatment.
Grade B
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
5.4 Cardiovascular disease
A. Coronary heart disease
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• In addition to the importance of managing hyperglycaemia,
management of the other traditional concomitant CV risk factors;
i.e. BP and LDL-C remain important - with BP targets of 130-139/7079 mmHg and LDL-C according to CV risk category, with proven
clinically meaningful CV risk reduction.
• Recent CVOTs have proven that certain GLDs (GLP1-RAs and SGL T2-i)
are also cardioprotective, beyond their glucose-lowering effects.
These CV benefits are seen irrespective of HbA 1c level achieved.
Paradigm shifts in management algorithm recommendations are
emerging.
• There is an emerging role of SGL T2-i to reduce heart failure
hospitalisations in high risk ASCVD patients.
• However, if these newer medications are not available, achieving
HbA1c safely, remains an important target.
• T2DM is associated with increased risk of coronary heart disease (CHD),
manifesting as angina, MI, CCF and sudden death. In addition, T2DM may
lead to diabetic cardiomyopathy. CHD accounts for up to 2/3 rd of deaths
associated with T2DM.6 (Level III) 644 (Level II-2)
• In the 2015-2016 acute coronary syndrome registry (National Cardiovascular
Disease Database – NCVD-ACS registry), 44.7% of patients had T2DM as a CV
risk. This was the 2nd most common CV risk factor, after hypertension at 63.3%
(Available online at http://www.acrm.org.my/ncvd/reports_annualReports.
php)4 (Level II-3)
• The increased risk of CHD in patients with T2DM is only partially explained by
concomitant risk factors such as dyslipidaemia, hypertension, smoking and
obesity.
• Hyperglycaemia itself and its consequences are highly linked to the increased
risk of CHD and its related mortality.645,646 (Level II-1)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Among those above the age of 60, there is a similar occurrence of MI in
T2DM patients and in those without T2DM who had previous MI, thus giving
rise to the notion that T2DM is a CHD-defining disease. 647 (Level II-2) Cardiometabolic risks associated with T2DM and CHD in T2DM should be managed
aggressively.647,648 (Level II-2)
• CHD in T2DM is characterised by its early onset,649 (Level II-2) extensive disease at
the time of diagnosis, and higher morbidity and mortality after MI.650,651 (Level II-2)
• Angiographic findings in diabetes are more diffuse, involving multiple
coronary arteries including small and distal vessels.652 (Level II-2) 653,654 (Level I)
• There is a strong and continuous association between proteinuria and future
risk of CHD.655 (Level I)
• Heart failure hospitalisation incidence in people with T2DM (even after
adjusting for confounders, e.g. age and sex) has been found to be 2-fold
higher, compared to those without diabetes.656-658 (Level II-2). Predictors of heart
failure development were younger age and higher BMI.658 (Level II-2)
› Poor glycaemic control is also associated with increased risk of HF; every
1% increase in HbA1c is associated with an 8% increased risk of heart failure
(95% CI 5%,12%).659 (Level II-2)
› Approximately 40% of hospitalised heart failure patients with low ejection
fraction have T2DM. Post discharge, T2DM is associated with worse
prognosis, increased risk for combined CV mortality and heart failurerelated re-hospitalisation.660 (Level II-2)
Screening
• Typical symptoms of CHD warrant a prompt referral to a cardiologist for
further assessment. However, it is quite common for patients with T2DM to
have atypical symptoms or even ‘silent’ CHD.
• Atypical symptoms include dyspnoea, fatigue, and GI symptoms associated
with exertion.661 (Level II-1)
• In asymptomatic patients, routine screening for coronary artery disease is
not recommended because it does not improve outcome as long as they are
receiving intensive medical therapy for optimal CV risk factor control.662 (Level I)
› Risk calculators: There is uncertainty whether current strategies for
providing CVD risk scores affect CVD events. The identified studies have
multiple study limitations and substantial heterogeneity in interventions,
outcomes and analyses making interpretation of results difficult.663 (Level I)
› New models for implementing and evaluation CVD risk scores in adequately
powered studies are needed to define the role of applying CVD risk scores
in primary CVD prevention.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Screening for presence of CHD should be done for:
› T2DM patients with peripheral or cerebrovascular disease;647,648 (Level I) and
› T2DM patients with presence of proteinuria and DKD.655 (Level I)
• Resting electrocardiogram (ECG) is indicated for T2DM patients:
› with hypertension; or
› if CVD is suspected.664 (Level II-2)
Recommendations: Screening for CVD
2. In asymptomatic patients whose CV risk factors are
not to target. Grade A
3. A resting ECG is indicated in patients with T2DM and
hypertension, or if CVD is suspected. Grade B
1. In asymptomatic patients, routine screening for
coronary artery disease is not recommended. Routine
screening does not improve outcomes as long as
ASCVD risk factors are treated to target.
Grade A
Management
I. General management
• Lifestyle modification, weight management and increased physical activity
are important measures.95,665-667 (Level I)
› Reduced caloric intake to lower excessive body weight and regular
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity of ≥150 minutes/week is beneficial
in improving CV risk factors, glycaemic control and inducing remission of
T2DM. (Refer Section 3.5)
› Mortality and CV event reduction with lifestyle intervention alone has not
been demonstrated in RCTs.
• Smoking cessation is strongly recommended and a high priority.668 (Level I)
› Smoking increases the risk of CVD and premature death.
II. Glycaemic control
• Intensive glycaemic control has more beneficial CV effects when achieved
early and maintained throughout the course of T2DM management. 310,376,377
(Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• For management strategies of hyperglycaemia in patients admitted with
acute coronary syndrome/unstable angina/heart failure, refer to Section 6.1
(management in acute illness).
• In patients with T2DM with stable heart failure, metformin may be continued
if estimated glomerular filtration rate remains >30 mL/min/1.73 m2.669 (Level II)
• TZDs should be avoided in patients with pre-existing heart failure due to
increased risk of fluid retention.303 (Level I)
• DPP4-i have demonstrated CV safety (TECOS, CARMELINA SAVORTIMI).160,191-193 (Level I)
› However, saxagliptin should be avoided in patients with pre-existing heart
failure6 (Level III) as it has been shown to be associated with increased risk of
hospitalisation for heart failure.193 (Level I)
• SGL T2-i/GLP1-RA have been shown to demonstrate CV benefit in those with
ASCVD or who are at high CV risk irrespective of HbA1c achieved.201,202,248,259,670-672
(Level I)
• In addition, SGL T2-i in T2DM with ASCVD or high risk for ASCVD or DKD
have been confirmed to significantly reduce hospitalisation for heart
failure.201,203,673-676 (Level I) Most of the patients in these trials did not have heart
failure at baseline (ranging from 10.0%-14.4%).
› A meta-analysis of two dedicated heart failure trials, 950 (Level I) DAPA-HF206
(Level I) and EMPEROR-Reduced, 951 (Level I) that recruited patients with HFrEF
(42-50% with known T2DM) showed:
- Over a median of 16.0-18.2 months, there was a significant reduction in
risk of CV death or heart failure (HR 0.75, 95% CI: 0.68-0.84, p<0.0001) vs.
placebo.950 (Level I)
- There was also significant reduction in first hospitalisation for heart
failure (HR 0.69, 95% CI: 0.62-0.78, P<0.0001) vs. placebo.950 (Level I)
- These significant benefits were seen in both patients with T2DM as well
as those without (Refer to Section 3.6-SGL T2-i).206,950,951 (Level I)
› These heart failure benefits are found irrespective of glucose-lowering
and also in non-diabetic subjects,206,950 (Level I)
› SGL T2-i has been given a specific indication for use to reduce hospitalisation
for heart failure in adults with T2DM with ASCVD or multiple CV risk (use
SGL T2-i that has label indication for heart failure prevention).
• Less rigorous glycaemic targets may be appropriate for elderly patients and
those with severe co-morbidities or advanced CVD.310 (Level III)
III. BP control (Refer to Section 3.9.1)
• BP control to target of 130-139/70-79 mmHg with coronary artery disease
(existing ASCVD or 10-year ASCVD of ≥15%) if it can be safely achieved.361-366 (Level I)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• In patients with known ASCVD, consider ACE inhibitor 368,369 (Level I) or ARB
therapy if ACE inhibitor intolerant370 (Level I) to reduce the risk of CV events.
IV. Lipid control (Refer to Section 3.9.2)
V. Antiplatelet therapy
• There is strong evidence that aspirin is effective for secondary prevention of
cardiovascular events.677,678 (Level I)
• The Japanese Primary Prevention of Atherosclerosis with Aspirin for
Diabetes (JPAD) study showed that daily low-dose aspirin (81 or 100 mg
daily) taken for >4 years in asymptomatic people with T2DM failed to show a
significant effect on a broad composite of CVD endpoints. However, the risk
of fatal coronary or cerebrovascular events was significantly decreased in
the aspirin group in those >65 years old.549 (Level I)
• A recent large primary prevention trial (ASCEND trial) showed reduction in
CV events but with an increased rate of GI haemorrhage.679
› 2 other studies showed no benefit in primary prevention.680,681
› In general, those with low risk (<50 year of age with no major risk for
ASCVD) aspirin is not recommended as primary prevention.
• However, in those who are at increased CV risk, aspirin therapy may be
considered after a discussion with the patient on the benefits vs. increased
risk of bleeding.549,678,679,682,683 (Level I)
• For patients with ASCVD and documented aspirin allergy, clopidogrel (75 mg/
day) may be used.677 (Level I)
VI. Revascularisation
• In T2DM patients with NSTEMI, early invasive revascularisation (where
possible), will result in similar or greater reduction in death and MI compared
to the overall population.684 (Level I)
• T2DM should be considered as a distinct disease entity that is critical for the
selection of myocardial revascularisation strategies in multi vessel disease.
› Current evidence indicates that in stable patients with coronary anatomy
suitable for both procedures and low predicted surgical mortality, CABG
is superior to PCI in reducing the composite risk of death, MI, or stroke, as
well as death.685-687 (Level I)
• Presence of diabetic retinopathy is not a contraindication for thrombolytic
therapy.688 (Level II-1)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Management of CVD
2. Multi-factorial management to achieve glycaemic, BP
and lipid targets to reduce CV events. Grade A
3. Aspirin should be used for secondary prevention
in T2DM patients. For patients with ASCVD and
documented aspirin allergy, clopidogrel (75 mg/day)
should be used.
Grade A
4. Primary prevention of ASCVD with low dose aspirin
(100 mg) is only recommended in patients at increased
cardiovascular risk after discussion with the patient on
benefits vs. risk of bleeding.
Grade A
5. In patients with T2DM with established atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease, consider adding SGL T2-i/
GLP1-RA with demonstrated CV benefit as part of the
glucose lowering regimen.
Grade A
7. In patients with T2DM and multi vessel coronary artery
disease or complex left anterior descending coronary
artery disease, and suitable coronary anatomy for
revascularization, CABG is superior to PCI.
Grade A
6. Among patients with ASCVD with pre-existing or at
high risk of heart failure (HFrEF) SGL T2-i should be
considered, even if HbA1c is at target.
Grade A
1. Lifestyle measures remain important, including:
a. attainment of appropriate weight, increased
physical activity; and
b. smoking cessation.
Grade A
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
B. Cerebrovascular disease (Stroke)
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• 3-point MACE outcomes in the recent CVOTs incorporate non-fatal
stroke as part of the composite CV outcome.
• Recent GLP1-RA trials (SUSTAIN-6 and REWIND) have found positive
3-point MACE outcome, largely driven by reduction in non-fatal
stroke. These interesting findings may need to be confirmed in
dedicated cerebrovascular event trials.
• Hyperglycaemia which is present in 40% of patients with stroke on admission,
is strongly predictive of poor clinical outcomes and high mortality.689 (Level 11-2)
• The Asia-Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration (APCSC) found that the HR
for ischaemic stroke was 2.64 (95% CI 1.78,3.92); and the age, sex adjusted
HR for death from cerebrovascular disease was 2.02 (95% CI 1.57,2.59) in
individuals with T2DM, compared to non-T2DM. The ratios were the same in
the Asian and Australasian subgroups.690 (Level II-2) The risk of stroke is higher in
women than in men.647,648 (Level II-2)
• There is no recommendation for intensive IV or SC insulin in these patients as
there was no improvement in functional outcomes at 90 days.691 (Level I)
• Thiazolidinediones (TZDs), PROACTIVE cardiovascular outcome trial (CVOT)
showed positive outcomes for 3-point MACE of which the most significant
was reduction of 47% of recurrent stroke. 692 (Level 1) However, side-effects of
TZDs of weight gain, increased risk of CHF and osteoporotic fracture render
the benefit-risk ratio unfavourable.
• GLP1-RA CVOTs have shown positive 3-point MACE outcomes largely driven
by significant reduction of non-fatal stroke (39% risk reduction in SUSTAIN-6
and 24% risk reduction in REWIND).248,259 (Level I)
Recommendations: Stroke
1. Patients with ischaemic stroke should be managed
similarly as patients with established ASCVD. Grade B
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
C. Peripheral arterial disease (PAD)
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Absent peripheral pulses are independent predictors of major
vascular outcomes in patients with T2DM These clinical indicators
can be used to improve risk stratification for patients with T2DM.
• Presence of critical limb ischaemia features (e.g. rest pain with
ulcers or tissue loss) identifies a high-risk individual for amputation
and/or mortality. Urgent referral to specialist care is indicated.
• People with T2DM have a three-fold increased risk of developing peripheral
arterial disease (PAD), which mainly affects the infra-popliteal arteries.693 (Level III)
• The diagnosis of PAD in T2DM is often delayed due to the presence of
concomitant neuropathy which results in the lack of typical PAD symptoms.43,694
(Level III)
• Absence of peripheral pulses has been shown to be an independent predictor
of risk for major CV outcomes, heart failure and nephropathy.695 (Level II-1)
• Risk factors for PAD in T2DM include:696,697 (Level II-2)
› older age
› higher HbA1c
› elevated SBP
› low HDL-C levels
› previous CVD
› smoking
Assessment
• All patients with T2DM undergoing annual screening for peripheral
neuropathy should also be assessed for peripheral vascular disease, with
appropriate history taking and palpation of the peripheral pulses (femoral,
popliteal, posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis artery).693,694,698 (Level III)
• If PAD is suspected from the initial screening, several non-invasive bedside
tests can be done for further evaluation (Table 5-6).43,694,698,699 (Level III)
› Ankle brachial index (ABI) is used widely due to feasibility.
› Toe brachial index (TBI) is useful in the presence of medial calcinosis.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Table 5-6: Non-invasive bedside tests for evaluation of PAD.
Test Result Implication
Recommended
alternative action
Ankle brachial
index (ABI)
<0.90 Diagnostic for PAD
0.90-1.3* PAD less likely
>1.3 May be due to
medial calcinosis
Other tests
e.g. TBI or CWD
recommended
Toe brachial
index (TBI)
<0.70 Diagnostic for PAD
≥0.75 PAD less likely
Continuous wave
Doppler of ankle
arteries (CWD)
Triphasic
pedal Doppler
waveforms
PAD less likely
*Note: ABI values may be falsely elevated in diabetes due to vessel stiffening/calcification.
• In patients with T2DM and a foot ulcer, clinical examination alone may not
exclude PAD hence combined modality testing of CWD and ABI or TBI is
recommended.694 (Level III)
• Patients with features of critical limb ischaemia (rest pain with ulcers or
tissue loss due to PAD) are at high risk of amputation and mortality and
should be referred urgently for specialist care.700,701 (Level III)
Management
• Principles of PAD management in T2DM:699 (Level III)
› Reducing CV risk factors and treating concomitant disorders.43,694 (Level III)
- Smoking cessation and lifestyle modification.
- Statins for secondary prevention of CV events; aim for LDL-C <1.4mmol/L
or LDL-C reduction of at least 50% from baseline.
- Adequate blood pressure and glycaemic control.
- Anti-thrombotic therapy.43,699 (Level III)
- Single anti-platelet therapy (SAPT) is recommended only in symptomatic
PAD or after revascularization.
- For those requiring SAPT, clopidogrel may be preferred over aspirin.677 (Level I)
- Double anti-platelet therapy (DAPT) is used only for a limited period
after certain revascularization procedures.
- Combination therapy of low-dose rivaroxaban (2.5 mg bd) and aspirin
(100 mg od) can be considered in patients with chronic symptomatic PAD
and T2DM who do not have a high risk of bleeding.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
» In the COMPASS trial PAD sub analysis, the aspirin-rivaroxaban
combination significantly reduced composite endpoint of stroke, MI
or CV death, major adverse limb events and amputations. However, a
significant increase in major bleeding risk, particularly GI bleeding, was
observed.702 (Level I)
• Improving peripheral circulation in symptomatic patients.43,694,699 (Level III)
› Those with symptoms of PAD and diabetic foot ulcer/infection must be
assessed and treated urgently as they are at a high risk for major limb
amputation.
› Revascularization must be attempted when possible and amputation only
considered when revascularization options fail.
› Consider revascularization in a patient with PAD and a diabetic foot ulcer
that is not healing despite 4-6 weeks of optimal management.
› Patients with intermittent claudication can improve their walking distance
by doing regular exercise training programmes. However, those with
severe/disabling claudication may require revascularization.
Recommendations: Peripheral Arterial Disease
4. Critical limb ischaemia warrants prompt referral and
multidisciplinary management. Grade C
1. Patients with suspected PAD from initial screening
are recommended to be further evaluated with
bedside tests such as ABI, TBI or CWD.
Grade B
2. It is recommended that patients with PAD receive
appropriate treatment to achieve adequate control
of their CV risk factors.
Grade B
3. Antiplatelet therapy is indicated for secondary
prevention of CV events in patients with symptomatic
PAD.
Grade B
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
5.5 Diabetic foot
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Screening for peripheral neuropathy with loss of protective
sensation (LOPS) and peripheral arterial disease (PAD) should be
done at diagnosis and repeated at least annually.
• High risk feet (history of ulcers or amputations, foot deformities,
LOPS, PAD) will need more frequent detailed foot assessment.
• The prevalence of diabetic foot ulcer is 15% over the course of the disease703
(Level II-2) while the prevalence of lower limb amputation is 4.3% 704 (Level III) and
remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality.
• Peripheral neuropathy which is asymptomatic in up to 50% 704 (Level III) of
patients, predisposes to ulcerations and vasculopathy further retards the
healing process.
Risk factors for foot ulcers and amputation
• Risk factors include:6,705 (Level III)
› previous amputation,
› history of foot ulcer, pre-ulcerative callous or corn, and foot deformity,
› peripheral neuropathy with loss of protective sensation (LOPS),
› peripheral arterial disease (PAD),
› visual impairment,
› DKD – especially patients on dialysis,
› poor glycaemic control, and
› cigarette smoking.
Assessment of diabetic foot ulcers
• All patients with T2DM should be assessed for risk of diabetic foot ulcers with
proper history taking and comprehensive foot evaluation (Refer the Malaysian
CPG for Management of Diabetic Foot [2 nd edition] available at http://www.
moh.gov.my/moh/resources/Penerbitan/CPG/Orthopaedics/Draft%20CPG%20
Diabetic%20Foot.pdf)6,698 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Screening for peripheral neuropathy with LOPS and PAD should be done
at diagnosis and repeated at least annually. 694,698 (Level III) For peripheral
neuropathy with LOPS, refer to Section 5.3.
› For PAD assessment is by palpation of foot pulses. Ankle brachial index
testing should be performed.
• Those at high risk (history of ulcers or amputations, foot deformities, LOPS,
PAD) will need more frequent detailed foot assessment.706 (Level III)
Prevention
• All patients with T2DM should receive foot care education at least annually,
and more frequently in those with high risk foot conditions.694,698 (Level III)
• Relevant patient education such as:6,694,698 (Level III)
› proper care of feet including nail and skin care,
› daily visual inspection of feet with a mirror, in those with LOPS,
› check for presence of foreign or penetrating objects before putting on
footwear,
› advise not to walk barefoot outdoors or indoors,
› selection of appropriate footwear according to foot risk, including certain
prescribed footwear for high risk patients; and
› seek early treatment in presence of active diabetic foot problems (e.g.
ulceration, infection, gangrene or limb ischaemia).
Management
• Patients with active diabetic foot problems (ulceration, infection, gangrene,
critical limb ischaemia, acute Charcot neuroarthropathy) should be referred
urgently and seen within 24 hours in secondary/tertiary care, and preferably
managed by a multidisciplinary foot care team.698 (Level III)
• Trauma induced ulcers with no other risk factors will require the standard
wound care and close follow-up until full recovery.
• Antibiotics should be used as an adjunct to surgical debridement for diabetic
foot ulcers with local or systemic infection but should not be used to prevent
infection.694,698 (Level III)
• Appropriate analgesia should be given for adequate pain relief in those with
painful neuropathy.698 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Diabetic foot
3. A multidisciplinary approach is recommended for
patients with foot ulcers and high-risk feet. Grade B
1. All patients with T2DM are recommended to have
at least annual comprehensive foot assessment to
identify individuals with risk factors, as well as receive
foot care education to avoid ulcers and amputations.
Grade B
2. Active diabetic foot ulceration, infection, gangrene,
critical limb ischaemia require urgent referral and
appropriate management.
Grade C
5.6 Sexual dysfunction
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Erectile dysfunction is common in T2DM men. It has been reported
to be a marker for potential CVD. Screening for CHD in T2DM men
with ED is recommended.
• Hypogonadism also occurs more frequently in T2DM men and should
be excluded.
• Testosterone therapy improves response to PDE-5 inhibitors.
5.6.1 Erectile dysfunction
• Erectile dysfunction (ED) is the inability to achieve, maintain or sustain
an erection firm enough for sexual intercourse that may result from
psychological, neurological, hormonal, arterial, or cavernosal impairment or
from a combination of these factors.707,708 (Level II-3)
• The prevalence of ED among diabetic men varies from 35% to 45%.709-717 (Level II-3)
› ED is three times more common in men with T2DM and its annual, ageadjusted incidence is doubled compared to men without T2DM.718,719 (Level II-1)
› Compared to men without T2DM, it occurs 10-15 years earlier and is less
responsive to treatment.719-721 (Level II-3)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• ED has been reported to be a marker for potential CVD, with significant
association with all-cause mortality and CV events.722-725 (Level II-2)
• Risk factors of ED710-712,721,726-729 (Level II-2)
› Advancing age, duration of T2DM, poor glycaemic control, presence
of diabetic microvascular complications, CV disease, hypertension,
hyperlipidaemia, sedentary lifestyle, cigarette smoking and androgendeficiency/hypogonadism.
• Rates of hypogonadism are higher in men with T2DM compared to the
general population.
› Prevalence of 30%-40% hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism has been
reported in men with T2DM.730,731 (Level II-2)
› Symptoms and signs suggestive of hypogonadism are reduced libido,
absence of early morning erection and testicular atrophy.
Screening and diagnosis
• All adult men with T2DM should be regularly screened for ED. Many patients
do not voluntarily offer the history.732
• All patients with T2DM and ED should be screened for CHD.
• Hypogonadism should be excluded in men with T2DM and ED.
› Early morning blood for total testosterone (taken before 11.00 am) should
be performed.733 (Level III)
• Screening can be done using the 5-item version of the International Index of
Erectile Function (IIEF) questionnaire (Refer Appendix 10 ).734,735 (Level I)
Management
• No RCTs have shown that improving glycaemic control directly prevents or
improves ED.
• However, indirect evidence derived from the UKPDS 541 and ACCORD 610
showed that early intensive glucose control reduced the incidence of
neuropathy, which is a major contributing factor for ED.
• Optimisation of glycaemic control, management of other co-morbidities and
lifestyle modifications should be encouraged.(Level III)
• Psychosexual counselling is recommended in functional ED.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Where possible, avoid medications that may cause or worsen ED such as:
› beta blockers, alpha blockers, calcium channel blockers, diuretics,
› tricyclic antidepressants, SSRIs, lithium, neuroleptics; and
› anticonvulsants.
• Phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5) inhibitors e.g. sildenafil, tadalafil and vardenafil
should be offered as first-line therapy.736-740 (Level I)
› There is evidence that scheduled daily therapy is effective in the population
with T2DM and ED 741 (Level I) 742 (Level II-1) and may improve efficacy with lower
rates of side effects.
› PDE-5 inhibitors are contraindicated in unstable angina, poor exercise
tolerance or concomitant nitrate medication.
› Referral to a urologist may be necessary for those not responding to PDE-5
inhibitors or in whom PDE-5 inhibitors is contraindicated.743 (Level III)
• Other therapies include intracavernosal injections, intraurethral alprostadil,
vacuum devices with constricting band and surgery.
• Testosterone therapy should only be offered to those who are proven to
have hypogonadism and are symptomatic.744 (Level I) 745 (Level II-2)
› Testosterone therapy improves the efficacy of PDE-5 inhibitors. 746 (Level II-1)
747 (Level II-2)
› Several non-randomised, observational studies have produced conflicting
results with regards to cardiac risk vs. benefit from testosterone
replacement.748 (Level I) 749,750 (Level II-2)
Testosterone replacement therapy for ED
1. Biochemical confirmation of hypogonadism
2. Testosterone (parenteral/oral/transdermal)
3. PDE-5 inhibitor
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Erectile dysfunction
2. Optimisation of glycaemic control and other risk
factors should be encouraged. Grade C
3. PDE-5 inhibitor should be offered as first-line therapy
if there are no contraindications. Grade A
1. All adult men with diabetes should be screened for ED. Grade C
4. Testosterone therapy should be considered in
symptomatic hypogonadal men as it improves
response to PDE-5 inhibitor therapy.
Grade A
5. Referral to a urologist should be considered for men
who do not respond to PDE-5 inhibitors or for whom
the use of PDE-5 inhibitors is contraindicated.
Grade C
5.6.2 Female sexual dysfunction
• Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) is defined as persistent or recurring decrease
in sexual arousal, dyspareunia and difficulty or inability to achieve an orgasm
that leads to personal distress and relationship difficulties.751 (Level III)
› It consists of female sexual interest/arousal disorder, orgasmic disorder
and genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.752 (Level III)
› Most women experience a combination of these disorders.
• FSD is estimated to occur in 24-75% of women with T2DM.753-761 (Level III)
• Risk factors:
› Age, duration of diabetes, poor glycaemic control, menopause, micro- and
macro-vascular T2DM complications, and psychological factors (depression
and anxiety disorder).754-756,759,761-763 (Level II-2)
Screening and diagnosis
• All women with T2DM should be asked about sexual dysfunction.
• Brief sexual symptom checklist can be used as initial screening.
• The patient’s medical, surgical, social and psychiatric history should also be
obtained.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Diagnosis of FSD can be established by using FSFI questionnaire that consists
of 19 questions covering all domains of sexual dysfunction 764 (Level III) available
at www.fsfiquestionnaire.com.
• Physical examination should include assessment of thyroid status or for
presence of galactorrhoea.
• Gynaecological examination should be performed if indicated.
• Oestrogen deficiency is usually detected by history and examination.
• Investigations 764 (Level III)
› General
- Haemoglobin
- To rule out metabolic dysfunction
› Endocrine
- Thyroid
- Prolactin and gonadotropins
- To rule out pituitary dysfunction
• Routine laboratory testing for testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEAs) levels are not recommended.764 (Level III)
Management
• Emphasis should be made to treat psychosocial disorders and relationship
disharmony.
• Optimisation of glycaemic control should be encouraged.
• Where possible, avoid drugs that may affect sexual function:
› beta blockers, alpha blockers, calcium channel blockers, diuretics,
› tricyclic antidepressants, SSRIs, lithium, neuroleptics,
› anticonvulsants,
› oral contraceptive pills.
• In postmenopausal women, tibolone has been associated with
significant increases in sexual desire and arousal provided there are no
contraindications.765 (Level I)
• Topical lubricants, vaginal moisturisers and local oestrogen application aid
with vaginal dryness and dyspareunia.
• Androgen, DHEAs and PDE5 inhibitor are not recommended.766,767 (Level III)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Female sexual dysfunction
1. FSD is common and should be screened and managed
where appropriate. Grade C
5.7 Mental health issues in T2DM
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Diabetes distress/depression is common and increasingly recognised
as a barrier to patients' ability to cope and self-manage their diabetes.
• Psychological and social factors need to be assessed as an integral
part of management.
• Referral to a Mental Health specialist may be indicated in specific
circumstances.
• Psychological comorbidity, such as depression and/or diabetes-specific
emotional distress (diabetes distress), is widespread in people with T2DM
with an overall prevalence of 36% for diabetes distress and 15% for
depression.768,769 (Level II-2)
• In a study involving 2508 patients with T2DM from 12 health clinics in
Malaysia, 11.5% were found to have depression.770 (Level II-2)
• Psychological and social factors are important influences on the ability
of patients to cope with the daily demand of diabetes care and selfmanagement.
• Patients with depression and diabetic distress are more likely to have poorer
health outcomes including uncontrolled blood sugars,771 (Level III) complications
from diabetes, reduced quality of life and higher rates of all-cause mortality.772
(Level I)
• It is pertinent to address mental status of T2DM:
› at the time of diagnosis
› at diagnosis of complications
› when there is loss of glycaemic control/lack of treatment compliance
› at time of treatment intensification.
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
• Symptoms to look for may include prolonged period of moodiness with any
or all of the following:
› appetite changes,
› loss of interest in daily activities,
› feeling of despair,
› inappropriate sense of guilt,
› sleep disturbance,
› weight loss,
› suicidal thoughts.
• Indications for referral to a mental health specialist may include:
› depression with the possibility of self-harm,
› debilitating anxiety (alone or with depression),
› indications of an eating disorder,
› cognitive functioning that significantly impairs judgment.
• Behavioural treatment interventions which include cognitive behavioural
therapy and exercise as shown in Program ACTIVE II has demonstrated
clinically meaningful improvements in depression outcomes in adults with
T2DM and major depressive disorder.773 (Level I)
• It is important to acknowledge that mental health well-being is a very
important part of diabetes management.774,775 (Level III)
Recommendations: Mental health issues in T2DM
1. Diabetes distress/depression is common. Assessment
of psychological and social wellbeing should be
performed as part of continuing diabetes management;
at diagnosis, onset of complications, when diabetes is
out of control and whenever indicated.
Grade C
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
5.8 Periodontal disease in T2DM
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Oral health education should be provided to all patients with T2DM
emphasizing the increased risk of periodontal disease in T2DM. This
should include:
› the bi-directional relationship of periodontal disease and T2DM
› adverse effects on HbA 1c control due to untreated periodontal
disease
› successful management of periodontal disease will improve
metabolic parameters
• There is a direct relationship between periodontitis and cardio-renal
complications of T2DM. T2DM patients with periodontitis have been
found to have an increased CV mortality and morbidity, and also
increased mortality in patients with DKD.
• Periodontal disease is a chronic inflammatory disease, comprising two main
categories:
› gingivitis; and
› periodontitis which involves destruction of the tooth supporting structures
such as the alveolar bone, periodontal ligament and cementum. If left
untreated it causes tooth loss.776 (Level III)
• Signs and symptoms include:
› bleeding gums during brushing or eating,
› loose teeth, spacing or spreading of the teeth,
› oral malodour; and/or
› abscesses in the gums or gingival suppuration.
• Severe periodontitis is a major cause of tooth loss, nutritional compromise,
altered speech, low self-esteem and a poorer overall quality of life.67 (Level II-2)
• The bi-directional effects of periodontitis and T2DM
› Individuals with T2DM have been reported to be approximately twice as
likely to have more severe periodontal attachment loss than those without
T2DM, after controlling for other variables.65,777-779 (Level II-2)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
› Clinical studies have shown that elevated levels of pro-inflammatory
mediators within the periodontal tissues of people with poorly controlled
T2DM play a role in increased periodontal destruction 70 (Level III) as well as
contribute to insulin resistance and worsening glycaemic control.780 (Level III)
› Severe periodontitis has been associated with increased HbA1c levels.66 (Level II-2)
- The magnitude of increase in HbA 1c attributed to periodontitis in T2DM
was 0.29% (95% CI 0.20,0.27).66 (Level II-2) 70 (Level III) 781 (Level I)
- Subjects with severe periodontitis are at an increased risk of developing
(incident) T2DM (adjusted HR 1.19-1.33).66 (Level II-2)
• There is a direct relationship between the severity of periodontitis and
cardio-renal complications of T2DM.66,782 (Level II-2)
› The comorbid presence of periodontitis and T2DM in patients with DKD
is reported to elevate the 10-year all-cause mortality risk by 23% and CV
mortality risk by 16%.783,70 (Level III)
› CV complications (CV mortality, CHD or cerebrovascular events, and
subclinical heart disease) have also been significantly associated with the
comorbid presence of T2DM and periodontitis (OR 2.2-2.6; 95%CI 1.44.2).66,784 (Level II-2)
Management
• Current evidence indicates that in people with T2DM, periodontal therapy
accompanied by effective self-care is both safe and effective. Clinical
periodontal parameters improve following standard non-surgical therapy
even in people with poorly controlled T2DM.70 (Level III) 785 (Level I)
• Systematic reviews and meta-analyses have concluded that HbA1C reductions
ranges from 0.27% to 0.48% at 3-4 months following periodontal therapy.
781,785-787 (Level I)
• The adjunctive use of antibiotics does not enhance HbA 1C reduction beyond
scaling and root surface debridement alone among people with T2DM.70 (Level
III) 785 (Level I)
• As evidence mounts supporting the link between T2DM and periodontitis,
closer collaboration between physicians and oral health care professionals is
warranted to improve glycaemic control.70,788 (Level III) 69 (Level II-2)
• Additionally, there is a need for healthcare providers to routinely refer
these patients for oral healthcare as part of the holistic care for people with
T2DM.70 (Level III) 68,69 (Level II-2)
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS
Recommendations: Periodontal disease
1. Oral health education should be provided to all
patients with T2DM emphasizing on the increased
risk of periodontal disease in T2DM. Successful
management of periodontal disease will improve
metabolic parameters.
Grade A
2. Physicians/medical health professionals should
investigate the presence of periodontal disease
as an integral part of T2DM care visits. If present,
prompt referral should be made to the dentist for
periodontal examination.
Grade C
3. For all people with newly diagnosed diabetes,
referral for a periodontal examination should occur
as part of their management. Even if no periodontitis
is diagnosed initially, annual periodontal review is
recommended.
Grade C
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Management of T2DM in acute illness, stress and surgery
› HbA 1c should be considered for inpatients with hyperglycaemia or
known T2DM if it has not been done for the last 3 months.
› Insulin is the preferred pharmacological therapy for most
hospitalised patients with T2DM or hyperglycaemia.
• T2DM in adolescents
› Studies note that T2DM in the young represent a more severe and
rapidly progressive disorder than in adults, with a faster rate of
β-cell failure. This recognition has therapeutic significance with
regard to need for escalation of therapy.
› Although metformin and insulin are the mainstay of therapy for
adolescents with T2DM, liraglutide (a GLP1-RA) therapy may be
considered.
• T2DM in the elderly
› Plasma glucose and capillary plasma glucose should be used to
monitor glycaemic control.
› Optimal nutrition and regular exercise are recommended to
reduce frailty.
› Annual cognitive screening is recommended.
› Treatment de-escalation or discontinuation should be considered
in patients with multiple co-morbidities and poor life expectancy.
• T2DM in Ramadan
› Risk categories have been modified into 3 main groups: very high,
high and moderate/low risk.
› Recommendations for self-monitoring of plasma glucose
particularly in insulin treated T2DM individuals.
› SGL T2-i are generally safe in patients without advanced renal
disease.
› GLP1-RA are safe and effective in reducing weight and maintaining
HbA1c.
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
6.1 Management of T2DM in acute illness, stress and
surgery
• Hyperglycaemia in acute illness may reflect previously known or undiagnosed
T2DM.
› Acute illness results in a number of physiological changes (e.g. increase in
circulating concentrations of stress hormones) or therapeutic interventions
(e.g. glucocorticoid use) that can exacerbate hyperglycaemia.789 (Level III)
• Hyperglycaemia in turn, causes physiological changes that exacerbate the
acute illness, such as decreased immune function and increased oxidative
stress. This leads to a vicious cycle of worsening illness and poor glycaemic
control.789 (Level III)
• Both, hyper- and hypoglycaemia among inpatients are associated with
adverse outcomes, including death.790-792 (Level I) 793 (Level II-3)
› Inpatient hyperglycaemia is associated with a mortality rate of 11.2%.794 (Level II-2)
• A dedicated inpatient diabetes service applying well-developed standards
and careful transition to prearranged outpatient management is important
to improve patient outcomes.795,796 (Level II-2)
Inpatient hyperglycaemia in acute illness
• Hyperglycaemia in hospitalised patients can occur in those with:
› pre-existing T2DM; or
› no known history of T2DM.
• Inpatient hyperglycaemia is defined as any glucose value >7.8 mmol/L in
patients with no previous history of T2DM.797 (Level III)
• HbA 1c should be considered for inpatients with hyperglycaemia or known
T2DM if it has not been done for the last 3 months.
› Admission HbA 1c has been found to be a good predictor of glycaemic
control and response to insulin treatment, and tailoring treatment on
discharge.798,799(Level II-2)
Glycaemic control
A. In non-critically ill patients790-793,800,801 (Level I)
• Insulin is the preferred pharmacological therapy for most hospitalised
patients with T2DM or hyperglycaemia.
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
• In non-critically ill patients with T2DM, scheduled insulin regimens are
recommended to manage hyperglycaemia.
› During admission, OGLDs should be stopped when there is:
- poor oral intake,
- acute kidney injury,
- exposure to IV contrast dye (specifically for those on metformin),
- increasing severity of illness (illness becomes critical); and/or
- organ failure (e.g. renal failure, liver failure or heart failure).
› Regimens using insulin analogues and human insulin result in similar
glycaemic control in the hospital setting.802 (Level I)
› However, stable patients without the above conditions or contraindications
to medications used can have their home medications continued while in
the hospital.789,793,800 (Level II-2)
• In non-critically ill hyperglycaemic patients (with/without known T2DM) who
are
› taking orally well, options include basal bolus regimen or oral therapies
provided no contraindications.791,792 (Level I)
› not taking orally well or kept nil by mouth, options include basal plus
insulin regimen or variable rate intravenous insulin infusion.791,792 (Level I)
• The target plasma glucose of 7.8 mmol/L-10 mmol/L is recommended for
majority of non-critically ill patients.797 (Level III)
• Avoid plasma glucose values ≤3.9 mmol/L; if present, the glucose-lowering
therapy should be modified, unless the event is easily explained by other
factors (e.g. a missed meal).797 (Level III)
B. In critically ill patients803-812 (Level I)
• Appropriate glycaemic targets for patients with in-patient hyperglycaemia
who are critically ill (ICU setting) have not been firmly established.803-812 (Level I)
• Intensive insulin therapy (targeting plasma glucose of 4.5 mmol/L-6.0 mmol/L)
has been associated with an increased risk of hypoglycaemia and mortality
in the ICU setting compared to conventional glycaemic control (targeting
plasma glucose of <10 mmol/L).806 (Level II-1)
• Therefore, it is recommended to maintain plasma glucose levels between
7.8 mmol-10 mmol/L in critically ill patients.
• Variable Rate Intravenous Insulin infusion (VRIII) protocols with proven efficacy
and safety are recommended to minimise the risk of hypoglycaemia.813,814 (Level III)
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
C. In surgery803,804,807-812,815-826 (Level I)
• Acute hyperglycaemia during surgery increases postsurgical complications,
morbidity and mortality.
• Tight glycaemic control to achieve normoglycaemia while avoiding
hypoglycaemia is recommended.
• Plasma glucose target recommended is 6.0 mmol/L-10 mmol/L.815,827,828 (Level II-2)
• Strategies for glycaemic control815 (Level II-2)
› If plasma glucose is within target, current regimen may be continued
provided there is no contraindication for the agent.
› If plasma glucose is above target, to consider SC insulin regimen or VRIII.
› During intra-operative period and/or fasting, stop OGLDs and convert to
insulin i.e. basal plus insulin or VRIII.
› Once tolerating orally with stable plasma glucose, to resume previous preoperative regimen.
Use of insulin
• The use of sliding scale insulin (SSI) in inpatient hospital setting is
strongly discouraged.
• SSI protocols, which are extensively used, when compared to a basalbolus regime have been shown to be associated with:
› increased glycaemic variability; and
› longer time to achieve glycaemic target.792,829 (Level I)
D. Special clinical situations
• Patients receiving enteral or parenteral feeding
› In patients receiving continuous enteral feeding, options include basal
plus, basal bolus or VRIII.830,831 (Level I)
› In patients receiving parenteral feeding, options include basal plus, bolus
insulin only or VRIII.831,832 (Level I)
• Patients receiving corticosteroid therapy
› All patients receiving glucocorticoids equivalent to Prednisolone of ≥5mg/
day should have their plasma glucose monitored for 24-48 hours and
insulin commenced if plasma glucose is persistently high.
› Choices of regimen include:833,834 (Level I)
- basal bolus,
- bolus (prandial) + NPH OM/BD
- VRIII
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
• Patients on continuous SC insulin infusion (CSII)
› In absence of contraindications, CSII can be continued during hospitalisation.
› If patient is unable (mentally or physically) to manage CSII or there is
presence of contraindications, it can be converted to basal bolus insulin
regimen or VRIII according to the situation.835,836 (Level III)
Transition from hospital to home
• During recovery, education on diabetes care including treatment regime,
plasma glucose monitoring and medical nutritional therapy are important
aspects of discharge planning.
• On discharge:
› Rapid reduction in HbA 1c especially among those with long standing
uncontrolled disease and background retinopathy should be avoided to
prevent transient worsening of diabetes retinopathy.259,260,543 (Level I) 544-546 (Level II-3)
For further details, refer to the Ministry of Health, Practical Guide to Inpatient
Glycaemic Care, 2nd edition, 2020.
Recommendations: Management of T2DM in acute illnesses,
stress and surgery
1. In hospitalised patients without known diabetes,
plasma glucose >7.8, signifies hyperglycaemia and
warrants further monitoring.
Grade B
2. Inpatient target plasma glucose levels should be
between 7.8 mmol/L-10.0 mmol/L for majority of
critically ill and non-critically ill patients.
Grade B
6.2 T2DM in adolescents
• T2DM is rapidly increasing among the adolescents (ages 12-18 years) in
tandem with rising sedentary lifestyles, prevalence of obesity and increase
in-utero glycaemic exposure.837,838 (Level II-2)
• T2DM usually occurs in the 2 nd decade coinciding with physiologic pubertal
insulin resistance, more common in female gender, increased adiposity,
family history of diabetes and low socioeconomic status.839
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
• Cross-sectional, observational and therapeutic trials suggest that T2DM in
the young might represent a more severe and rapidly progressive disorder
than in adults.840,841 (Level III)
› Obese adolescent T2DM has severe peripheral and hepatic insulin
resistance, with approximately 50% lower peripheral insulin sensitivity
than age-matched obese peers without diabetes.
› β-cells appear to fail at a faster rate (20-35% yearly deterioration)842,843 (Level
II-2) vs. T2DM in adults (7-11% yearly loss).844,845 (Level II-2)
› The decline in insulin secretion relative to insulin sensitivity, eventually
result in progression to prediabetes and T2DM.846-849 (Level II-2)
• Youths with T2DM are expected to have long disease duration and
accumulation of glycemia-related complications.
› In addition, there is prolonged lifetime exposure to the other atherogenic
risk factors, e.g. dyslipidaemia and hypertension.
› Current evidence indicates that onset of DKD, neuropathy and retinopathy
occur earlier and progressed faster in youth onset T2DM compared with
youth-onset T1DM.850-853 (Level II-2)
› Retinopathy853 (Level II-2) and DKD progression 854 (Level II-2) are likely dependent
on the duration of disease and glycaemic control.
• T2DM may be misdiagnosed as T1DM
› in non-obese adolescents with diabetes,
› when ketosis/ketoacidosis is present at onset;855,856 (Level III) or
› when pancreatic autoantibodies are positive.857,858 (Level II-2)
• Other types of diabetes mellitus may be misdiagnosed as T2DM. These
include:
› obese T1DM,
› T1DM with low autoimmunity; or
› monogenic diabetes.
Screening and diagnosis
• Risk-based screening for prediabetes and/or T2DM should be considered
in adolescents or during onset of puberty who are overweight (BMI ≥85 th
percentile) or obese (BMI ≥95 th percentile) and who have one or more
additional risk factors for diabetes.859 (Level III)
• Screen every 2 years starting at the age of 10 or at onset of puberty, if
puberty occurs at a younger age.860 (Level III)
› A glucose load of 1.75 g/kg body weight (maximum of 75 g) for OGTT is used.
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
• Fasting insulin and c-peptide should be interpreted with caution due to
considerable overlap between T1DM, T2DM and monogenic diabetes at
onset and within 2 years of diagnosis.
• The overlap is due to initial recovery phase (honeymoon period) of T1DM,
glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity impairing insulin and c-peptide secretion. Such
measurements are of little value in the acute phase of the illness.
Management
A. Approach to management (Refer Figure 6-1).
• Goal of treatment is to achieve HbA1c <7.0% (<53 mmol/mol; i.e. 8.6 mmol/L).861
(Level III)
• Home SMBG targets as follows:861 (Level III)
› Premeal: 4.0 mmol/L-7.0 mmol/L
› Post meal: 5.0 mmol/L-10.0 mmol/L
› Prebed: 4.4 mmol/L-7.8 mmol/L
• HbA 1c should be measured every 3 months
• To avoid long-term complications, monitoring as described in Table 6-1 is
essential.862-864 (Level III)
Table 6-1: Essential monitoring in adolescents with T2DM.
Time points Essential monitoring
At diagnosis
and annually
Test for microalbuminuria or macroalbuminuria
Examination for retinopathy
Test for dyslipidaemia
Evaluation for NAFLD
Foot examination for neuropathy – foot pulses, pinprick
and vibration sensation, ankle reflex.
At every clinic
visit
Weight and height
BP (hypertensive if BP ≥95th percentile for age, sex and
height percentile) at every visit.
Inquiry about puberty, menstrual irregularities (PCOS for
female adolescence) and obstructive sleep apnoea
Psychosocial wellbeing (depression, eating disorder, social
adjustment, peer relationships and school performance to
determine referral for counselling)863,864
NAFLD: non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; BP: blood pressure; PCOS: polycystic ovarian syndrome.
Adapted from Acerini C et al. Pediatr Diabetes 2014.862 (Level III)
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
B. General management
• Management of T2DM in adolescents should involve the patient, his/her
family and cooperation from school personnel, emphasising healthy parental
modelling and conducive surroundings.
• Comprehensive education on self-management and recommendations must
be age-appropriate due to complex psychosocial elements and, sensitive to
the family’s cultural practices and financial resources.
• Comprehensive lifestyle programs that are integrated with diabetes
management to achieve 7%-10% decrease in weight in the overweight/
obese adolescent.
› Encourage least 30 min-60 min of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity at
least 5 days/week (and strength training at least 3 days/week).
› Focus on healthy eating patterns i.e. decrease calorie-dense food
consumption.
• A multidisciplinary diabetes team, including a physician, diabetes nurse
educator, registered dietitian, and psychologist or social worker is important.
C. Pharmacotherapy
• The safety and efficacy of OGLDs in adolescents have not been established.
• Among all the GLDs currently used to treat T2DM in adults, only metformin
and insulin are FDA approved for use in adolescents <18 years of age.
• Metformin should be started at 500 mg OD. Gradual dose increment over 3-4
weeks, as tolerated until the maximal dose of 1000 mg BD is achieved.865
• Insulin may be required for initial metabolic control. Transition from insulin
to metformin can usually be made when metabolic stability is reached. This
may take 2-6 weeks.(Level III)
• If glycaemic targets are not achieved with metformin (with or without basal
insulin), liraglutide can be considered866-868 (Level I) (avoid in patients with family
history of medullary thyroid carcinoma/MEN 2).
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Figure 6-1: Approach to initial and subsequent treatment of adolescents with T2DM.
New onset T2DM in overweight or obese adolescents
Pancreatic autoantibodies
HbA1c goals not met
HbA1c <8.5%
No acidosis or ketosis
Acidosis and/or DKA
and/or HHS
HbA1c ≥8.5%
No acidosis with or without ketosis
Basal insulin: start at 0.25 U/kg/day-0.5 U/kg/day and
escalate every 2-3 days based on SMBG
Metformin: titrate up to 2000 mg/day as tolerated
Metformin BD: Titrate up to
2000 mg/day as tolerated
Manage DKA/HHS
IV insulin until acidosis
resolves, then SC, as for T1DM
until antibodies are known
Continue or start metformin
Wean insulin guided by SMBG values
Continue or initiate MDI insulin or pump
therapy, as for T1DM
Discontinue metformin
Consider adding liraglutide
Initiate add-on insulin therapy: basal insulin to maximum 1.5 U/kg/day.
POSITIVENEGATIVE
BD: twice daily; SMBG: self-monitoring blood glucose; T1DM: type 1
diabetes mellitus; SC: subcutaneous; DKA: diabetic ketoacidosis; HHS:
Hyperosmolar Hyperglycaemic Syndrome; MDI: multiple dose insulin.
Adapted from American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care
in Diabetes. 2020, International Society of Pediatric and Adolescent
Diabetes 2018.6,869 (Level III)
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Recommendations: T2DM in adolescents
2. A glucose load of 1.75 g/kg body weight (maximum of
75 g) for OGTT is recommended. Grade C
3. Metformin and insulin remain the mainstay of T2DM
treatment in adolescents. Grade A
4. Incorporation of a multidisciplinary team in managing
diabetes in adolescence. Grade C
1. For those at risk of developing diabetes, screening
should be initiated at 10 years of age or at onset
of puberty if puberty occurs at a younger age and
repeated every 2 years.
Grade C
6.3 T2DM in elderly
• In 2019, it was estimated that the proportion of Malaysian population aged
over 65 years was 6.7%.870
• Diabetes is more common in the elderly (>60 years old). The prevalence of
T2DM in individuals between the ages of 60-64, 65-69 and 70-74 are 42.4%,
43.4% and 40.6%, respectively.1
• The elderly with T2DM is a very heterogeneous group ranging from active
individuals with little comorbidity and complications to frail individuals with
multiple serious co-morbidities and disabling complications.
• There is also an increased rate of age-related concomitant illnesses e.g.
hypertension, renal impairment, ischaemic heart disease, cognitive impairment
and functional disabilities with increased risk of falls.
• The life expectancy within this elderly diabetic population is highly variable.
Management
• In the elderly with T2DM and established complications, intensive control
reduces only the risk of microvascular events but not macrovascular events
or mortality.71,376,871 (Level I)
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
• PPG values have been shown to be a better predictor of outcome in elderly
patients compared to HbA1c or pre-prandial glucose values.872 (Level I)
› Plasma glucose and capillary plasma glucose should be used instead.
• Greater variability of glucose values is associated with poorer cognition 873
(Level III) despite equivalent glycaemic control.334,874 (Level II-3)
› Cognitive dysfunction and frailty increase the risk of hypoglycaemia and
vice versa.487,574,875 (Level III)
• Thus, glycaemic targets will depend on the severity of frailty and overall life
expectancy.
• The principle for choice of various OGLDs is similar in the elderly as in younger
patients.876 (Level III)
› SUs should be used with caution because of the risk of severe or fatal
hypoglycaemia.
› Risk of hypoglycaemia increases exponentially with age and is higher with
glibenclamide than gliclazide and glimepiride.877 (Level III)
› Glibenclamide is not recommended for use in patients with T2DM >60 years
of age.878 (Level III)
• Similar to OGLDs, the use of insulin in the elderly is associated with increased
risk of hypoglycaemia and therefore every effort should be made to minimise
the risk.
• Treatment de-escalation or discontinuation should be considered once organ
failure develops or end of life care is initiated.879 (Level III)
• Institutionalised elderly patients have impaired hormonal regulation and
counter-regulation, suboptimal hydration, variable appetite and nutritional
intake, polypharmacy and slowed intestinal absorption.880 (Level III)
• Optimal nutrition and protein intake (at least 1.5 g/kg/d - 15%-20% of the total
caloric intake), regular exercise with resistance training may be instituted to
increase muscle strength and quality to prevent sarcopenia.881-883 (Level III)
› This reduces the risk of fall secondary to frailty.
• Regular assessment of medical, psychosocial, functional and social domains
is necessary.
› Annual screening with tools such as the Mini-Mental State Examination, 884
Mini-Cognitive,885 the Montreal Cognitive Assessment 886 and the Clinical
Frailty Score887 (Level II) may help identify patients requiring neuropsychological
evaluation and referral to geriatrician, especially for those in whom
dementia is suspected.
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
• Other co-morbidities should also be treated to goal.
› Lipid-lowering therapy and aspirin therapy may benefit those with life
expectancies at least equal to the time frame of primary or secondary
prevention trials.
Table 6-2: Treatment goals for glycaemia, BP and dyslipidaemia in elderly
with T2DM.
Patient
characteristics
/ health status Rationale
Reasonable
HbA1c goal‡
Plasma
glucose
targets
(mmol/L)
BP
(mm Hg) Lipids
Healthy
(few coexisting
chronic
illnesses, intact
cognitive and
functional
status)
Longer life
expectancy ≤7.5
Fasting:
5-7.2
Pre-bed:
5.0-8.3
<140/90
Statins
treatment
as long as
tolerated.
Complex/
intermediate
(multiple
coexisting
chronic
illnesses*
or mild-to
moderate
cognitive and
functional
impairment)
Intermediate
life
expectancy,
high treatment
burden,
hypoglycaemia
vulnerability,
fall risk
<8.0
Fasting:
5-8.3
Pre-bed:
5.6-10
<140/90
Very complex/
poor health
(long-term
care or end
stage chronic
illnesses**
or moderateto-severe
cognitive and
functional
impairment)
Limited life
expectancy
makes benefit
uncertain
<8.5
Fasting:
5.6-10
Pre-bed:
6.1-11.1
<150/90
Individualised.
Consider
likelihood
of benefits
of statins
especially for
2° prevention
‡ A lower HbA1c goal may be set for an individual if achievable without recurrent or severe hypoglycaemia
or undue treatment burden. * Coexisting chronic illnesses are conditions serious enough to require
medications or lifestyle management and may include debilitating arthritis, cancer, congestive heart
failure, depression, emphysema, falls, hypertension, incontinence, stage 3 or worse DKD, MI and stroke.
“Multiple” means ≥3, but many patients may have ≥5. ** The presence of a single end-stage chronic
illness, such as stage 3–4 congestive heart failure or oxygen-dependent lung disease, DKD requiring
dialysis, or uncontrolled metastatic cancer, which significantly reduce life expectancy.
Adapted from American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care Diabetes 2020.6 (Level III
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Recommendations: T2DM in elderly
1. PPG values are a better outcome predictor compared
to HbA1c or pre-prandial glucose values. Grade C
3. Adequate nourishment and physical training to be
established. Grade C
4. Periodic cognitive assessment to determine
adherence to prescribed management. Grade B
2. Glycaemic targets depend on the degree of frailty
and overall life expectancy of each individual, rather
than chronological age.
Grade C
6.4 Diabetes in Ramadan
• Fasting during Ramadan is obligatory for all healthy adult Muslims.
• Ramadan fasting may have favourable physiological changes among healthy
individuals, such as decreased body weight and lipid profile.
• Fasting in certain individuals with diabetes may be associated with adverse
outcomes; hence they are not obliged to fast.
› However, many patients with diabetes choose to fast as shown in the
Epidemiology of Diabetes and Ramadan (EPIDIAR) study, 888 (Level II-2) despite
a clear instruction from the Quran on individuals who are exempted from
fasting (Surah Al Baqarah Verse 184-185).
• Management of Muslim patients with T2DM during Ramadan continues to be
a challenge for healthcare professionals.889 (Level II-2)
• There are several potential risks associated with fasting in Ramadan namely
hypoglycaemia, hyperglycaemia/DKA, dehydration and thrombosis.
• It is important to categorise patients who intend to fast based on risk
stratification as listed in Appendix 11. Those in high- and very high-risk
categories should abstain from fasting.890,891(Level III)
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Preparation prior Ramadan
• A pre-Ramadan medical assessment should be performed to categorise
patients in terms of risks of fasting as well as to optimise their management.
These include:
› general well-being,
› diabetes medications,
› glycaemic control,
› comorbidities; and
› complications.
• Patients and caregivers should receive education concerning self-care
regarding the following:892-894 (Level III)
› risks of adverse effect of fasting,
› SMBG,
› indications for termination of fasting,
› meal planning, food choices and fluid intake,
› exercise and physical activity; and
› modifications of glucose lowering medication (oral and in particular insulin).
• Risks of adverse effect of fasting
› There are several potential risks associated with prolonged fasting. It
is therefore important to increase patient awareness and to reduce
risks while, if possible, enabling patients to participate in their spiritual
experience of fasting during Ramadan.
› Adverse effects and risks associated with fasting include:
- hypoglycaemia, especially during the late period of fasting before iftar,
- severe hyperglycaemia after each of the main meals,
- dehydration,
- acute kidney injury in patients prone to dehydration, particularly elderly
patients and those with impaired kidney function.
• These diabetes-related risks can be minimised through education, appropriate
food choices and SMBG.
During Ramadan
A. Plasma glucose monitoring
• Patients are advised to monitor their plasma glucose and most importantly
when symptomatic of hypoglycaemia.
• The frequency of SMBG depends on risk factors and current medications.
› For those at moderate or low risk, this may be once or twice a day.
› Those at high or very high risk should check their plasma glucose levels
several times a day.
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
› Patients on insulin and/or SUs may need to monitor their plasma glucose
levels more frequently.
• The frequency of plasma glucose testing is dependent on the insulin regimen
and/or the risk of hypo- or hyperglycaemia.
B. Indications for termination of fasting (Refer to Table 6-3)
Table 6-3: Criteria to terminate fasting.
Plasma glucose (mmol/L) Time of day
<3.3895 (Level II-2) Anytime during fast
<3.9894,896 (Level II-2) Within 1st few hours of fasting; in particular,
if on SUs, meglitinides or insulin
>16.7895 (Level II-2) or
symptomatic of dehydration Anytime during fast
Without SMBG (Level III)
When experiencing symptoms of
hypoglycaemia, or severe dehydration,
e.g. giddiness, syncope or confusion
C. Meal planning, food choices and fluid intake
• Recommendations for Sahur (pre-dawn meal)897 (Level III)
› Should never be omitted.
› Should consist of a balanced meal with adequate CHO.
› To be taken as late as possible, just before Imsak (dawn).
› Intake of salty foods should be avoided to reduce risk of dehydration.
• Recommendations for Iftar (breaking of fast at sunset)897 (Level III)
› It should not be delayed.
› Intake of high-sugar foods should be avoided. However, 1-2 kurma (dates)
at the start of Iftar following the practice of the Prophet (Sunnah) may be
taken as part of CHO exchange.
› Sufficient fluid should be taken to replenish fluid loss during the day. Aim
for 8 glasses of fluid a day.
› The main meal is encouraged after the performance of Maghrib prayers.
• Supper after Tarawih (supererogatory prayers) can be considered as a prebed snack.
D. Exercise and physical activity
• Physical activity and exercise need to be adjusted during Ramadan.
• The following are recommended:894,898 (Level III)
› light and moderate intensity exercise on a regular basis,
› avoid rigorous exercise during the day because of the risk of hypoglycaemia,
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
› the timing of exercise is preferably performed 1-2 hours after Iftar,
› performance of Tarawih prayers is a form of physical activity.
E. Modification of GLDs
• Glucose-lowering therapies should be individualised during fasting.889 (Level II-2)
• Glucose-lowering therapies of choice are those with low risk of hypoglycaemia
and do not require modification with regards to dose and timing of
administration.
• OGLDs:
› The preferred OGLDs are those which have low risk of hypoglycaemia.
› OGLDs which have been proven to be safe in Ramadan include: 891,899 (Level III)
900 (Level II-2)
- Metformin
- Glimepiride
- Gliclazide
- Sitagliptin
- Vildagliptin901 (Level II-1)
› SGL T2-i902-905 has lower risk of hypoglycaemia, but are associated with some
safety concerns in particular, dehydration and should be used with caution
in patients with DKD ≥Stage 3.891 (Level III) 905 (Level II-3)
› The principles of OGLD modifications are:
- the non-fasting morning dose should be taken during Iftar, and the nonfasting evening dose should be taken during Sahur; and
- the dose of glucose-lowering agents may be maintained or reduced
depending on risk of hypoglycaemia.
Table 6-4: Recommendations for SMBG during Ramadan.
Mode of
treatment
Sahur
Mid-day
Iftar
Pre Post Pre
Post /
Pre-bed
OGLDs
(especially SU) √ √ √
Insulin
Basal √ √ √
Premixed BD √ √ √ √ √
Prandial/bolus √ √ √ √ √
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Table 6-5: Adjustment of OGLDs during fasting in Ramadan
Regimen Iftar Sahur
AGIs No change No change
Biguanides (metformin) No change No change
DPP-4i Switch timing to Iftar
Meglitinides No change No change
SUs No change
Glibenclamide: reduce/omit
Gliclazide: reduce/omit/switch
timing to Iftar
Gliclazide MR: switch timing to
Iftar/may need to reduce dose
Glimepiride: switch timing to
Iftar/may need to reduce dose
SGLT2-i* Switch timing to Iftar
TZDs No change
AGIs: Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors; DPP4-i: Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors; SU: sulphonylurea; SGL T2-i:
sodium-glucose transport protein 2 inhibitor; TZDs: thiazolidinediones. Based on the expert opinion of
this CPG’s committee.(Level III)
• Injectable glucose lowering therapies
› Liraglutide 906 (Level II-1) and exenatide are safe as an add-on treatment to
metformin and can be effective in reducing weight and HbA1c levels during
Ramadan.
› Data relating to the use of newer GLP1-RAs (lixisenatide and dulaglutide)
during Ramadan are lacking.
› No dose modification is required, and injection should be given at Iftar.
• Insulin therapy
› Insulin use during prolonged fasting carries an increased risk of
hypoglycaemia.
› Use of insulin analogues is preferred over regular human insulin due to a
number of advantages that include less hypoglycaemia.
› Individualised adjustments of insulin dose and timing will need to be
implemented when fasting during Ramadan. In those who are prone to
developing hypoglycaemia, insulin analogues may be a better alternative.889
(Level II-2)
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Table 6-6: Insulin adjustments during Ramadan.
Insulin Regimen Adjustment
Basal insulin only
Basal insulin to be taken at bedtime or after Iftar.
May need dose reduction if there is a risk of daytime
hypoglycaemia.
Patients who are well/tightly controlled suggest dose
reduction of 15-30%890 (Level III)
Premixed insulin
once daily Inject usual dose at Iftar.
Premixed insulin
twice daily
Reverse doses – Morning dose given at Iftar and
evening dose at Sahur.
Iftar: Give morning dose – dose may need to be
adjusted
Sahur: Insulin dose reduced by 20-50% to prevent
daytime hypoglycaemia.
OR change to short/rapid acting.
Basal bolus insulin
Basal Insulin
Prandial/bolus
insulin
Taken at bedtime or any time after Iftar.
May require a dose reduction if there is daytime
hypoglycaemia.
Sahur: Adjust according to CHO intake. May require
dose reduction to avoid post meal hypoglycaemia
Lunch: Omit.
Iftar: Dose adjustment according to CHO intake.
Insulin should be taken before the main meal.
Insulin pump
Basal insulin rate: May require reduction of up to 25%.
Prandial bolus: According to individualised insulin-tocarbohydrate ratio (ICR).
Adapted from Al-Arouj M, et al. Diabetes Care 2010; Pathan MF et al. Indian J Endocrinol Metab 2012;
Hui E, et al Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2010; Bin-Abbas BS Ann Saudi Med 2008; Hawli YM, et al Curr Ther
Res Clin Exp 2009; Benbarka MM et al Diabetes Technol Ther 2010; Ministry of Health Malaysia Practical
Guide to Insulin Therapy in Type 2 diabetes mellitus 2010.282,889,895,907-910
Post Ramadan visit
• A post-Ramadan follow-up meeting with HCPs is advisable in order to discuss
medication and regimen readjustments and assess how the patient handled
the fasting.
• It should be stressed to the patient that a safe fast one year does not
automatically make them a low risk for the next year due to the progressive
nature of the disease.
T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Recommendations: Management during Ramadan
4. SMBG recommended especially in patients on insulin
or SUs/meglitinides. Grade C
1. A pre-Ramadan medical assessment of general
well-being, glycaemic control, comorbidities and
complications should be performed to categorise the
patient’s risk from fasting as well as to optimise their
managements.
Grade C
2. Patients and caregivers should receive education
concerning self-care on risks of hypoglycaemia,
hyperglycaemia and dehydration.
Grade C
3. Glucose lowering therapies should be individualised
during fasting – modification of medication may be
needed.
Grade C
5. Clear advice on when to terminate fasting should be
given e.g.in the event of severe hypoglycaemia or
during “sick day”.
Grade C
PREVENTION OF T2DM
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• Individuals with pre-diabetes are at risk of progression to frank
diabetes and are also at higher CV risk.
• The mainstay of T2DM prevention is intensive behavioural lifestyle
intervention program to achieve target weight loss of at least 7%
(and improving insulin resistance).
• Metformin should be considered in those at very high risk,
prediabetes, previous history of GDM or for those who failed
lifestyle therapy after 6 months.
• Newer therapeutic agents, e.g. high dose liraglutide, in obese
prediabetic individuals have been shown to result in weight reduction
and delay progression to T2DM.
7.1 For people at risk
• There are many risk factors that predispose an individual or population to
developing glucose intolerance and eventually diabetes (Refer to Tables 2-1
& 2-2).
• There is ample evidence that lifestyle related changes as a result of rapid
urbanisation are influencing the explosion of T2DM. In particular weight gain
and a sedentary lifestyle.
• As T2DM is an endpoint in the glucose tolerance continuum, it is possible to
halt this slide from normal to IGT and subsequently T2DM.
7.2 For people with prediabetes
• Patients with IFG and/or IGT and/or HbA 1c 5.7%-6.2% are considered as
having prediabetes.
• Prediabetes increases the risk of progression to T2DM. In addition, patients
with prediabetes have a higher risk of CVD.
PREVENTION OF T2DM
• Progression to diabetes in patients with prediabetes can be delayed.
• Patients with prediabetes often have other CV risk factors, e.g. hypertension
and dyslipidaemia, 911 and, are associated with increased CV risk. 912 They
should be screened for presence of these modifiable CV risk factors, and
appropriate management instituted.
Interventions proven to reduce the conversion of IFG/IGT to T2DM
A. Lifestyle modifications
• Diet and moderate intensity physical activity remain the mainstay of
therapy.53,913-916 (Level I)
• There is strong evidence that combination of diet plus physical activity
reduces or delays the incidence of T2DM in prediabetes, particularly in IGT
patients.917 (Level I)
• Intensive behavioural lifestyle intervention program modelled on the
Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) should be advocated for all prediabetic
patients to achieve moderate-intensity physical activity (such as brisk walking)
for at least 150 min/week and a target weight loss of at least 7%.6 (Level III)
• Based on intervention trials, Mediterranean, low-calorie, low-fat eating plans
may be beneficial for prediabetes with an emphasis on high dietary fibre,
whole grains, legumes, nuts, fruits and vegetables, and minimal refined and
processed foods.6,918 (Level III)
• Interventions that use technology to disseminate diet and exercise lifestyle
programs have been shown to be effective in weight reduction and
improvements in glycaemic levels in patients with prediabetes and should be
considered as part of T2DM prevention strategy.6 (Level III) 919 (Level I)
• There is limited evidence on benefit of bariatric surgery on reduction of
progression to T2DM.920 (Level I) 921 (Level II-2)
B. Pharmacotherapy
• In addition to lifestyle intervention, metformin should be considered for
those at very high risk. These include those with:6,914,922 (Level I)
› combined IFG and IGT,
› IGT + obesity (BMI >35 kg/m2),
› IGT + <60 years old,
› FPG >6.1 mmol/L,
› HbA 1c >6%,
› previous history of GDM; or
› for those who failed lifestyle therapy after 6 months (refer to Figures 3-3
and 3-4).
• Metformin reduces progression from prediabetes to T2DM by ~30%914,922 (Level I)
with persistent benefit, especially in women with previous GDM (overall risk
reduction 18%) over the 10 years of the DPP/DPPOS program.923 (Level II-2)
• Metformin is the only drug that has received endorsement by our Malaysian
Regulatory authority as well as by other national guidelines for the prevention
of T2DM.6,924
• Refer Table 7-1 for other pharmacological interventions that have been
shown to delay the onset of T2DM.
• There is no firm evidence that DPP-4i and SGL T-2i compared with placebo,
substantially influence the rate of progression to T2DM.925,926 (Level I)
Table 7-1: Pharmacological interventions proven to delay progression to
T2DM
Pharmacological
agents May prevent/delay development of T2DM in:
Liraglutide925 (Level I)
Liraglutide 3mg/day delays progression to T2DM in
prediabetic patients with obesity (BMI >27 kg/m2 +
IGT, IFG, or HbA1c >5.7%)
AGIs927 (Level I) May prevent or delay the development of T2DM in
people with IGT.
Pioglitazone928 (Level I) Reduces the development of T2DM predominantly
in those with initial IFG and HbA1c of >5.7%.
Orlistat929 (Level I)
Beneficial in patients with IGT and BMI >28kg/m2 as
management of obesity for a minimum duration of
12 weeks.
T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus; BMI: body mass index; IGT: impaired glucose tolerance; IFG: impaired
fasting glucose; AGIs: alpha glucosidase inhibitors.
Recommendations: Prevention of T2DM
1. The mainstay of diabetes prevention is intensive
behavioural lifestyle intervention program to achieve
target weight loss of at least 7%.
Grade A
2. Metformin should be considered in those at very
high risk, prediabetes, previous history of GDM or for
those who failed lifestyle therapy after 6 months.
Grade A
PREVENTION OF T2DM
COMPLEMENTARY AND
ALTERNATIVE THERAPY IN T2DM
8.1 Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)
• Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is defined as healthcare
management outside of conventional medicine, with “complementary”
meaning used together with, and “alternative” meaning used in place of
conventional medicine.930
• The 2020 American Diabetes Association guidelines state that there is
insufficient evidence to recommend the daily use of supplements such as
chromium, vitamin D, cinnamon or herbs/supplement.6 (Level III)
• Many individuals with diabetes are hesitant to inform their healthcare
providers of their complementary therapy use.931 (Level III)
› Unfortunately, alternative therapies may contain harmful ingredients, may
be unsafe or may be improperly marketed as OTC products when they
should be marketed as prescription products.
• Healthcare providers are encouraged to enquire about the use of CAM in
people with diabetes.40 (Level III)
• It is very important to advise patients not to replace conventional medical
therapy for T2DM with an unproven alternative therapy.
› Patients need to be cautioned on the potential side effects, drug interactions
and lack of product standardisation.
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of supplements
such as chromium, vitamin D, cinnamon or herbs/supplement.
• Alternative therapies may contain harmful ingredients, may be unsafe
or may be improperly marketed as over-the-counter (OTC) products.
• A recent prospective RCT assessing vitamin D supplementation
failed to slow progression of prediabetes to overt diabetes.
› In addition, the increased costs that patients may incur when they use
ineffective therapies or delay treatment with proven therapeutic agents.
• Natural health products which are unlabelled should not be used to avoid
intake of products that may be adulterated with pharmaceuticals or other
contaminants.40 (Level III)
• Medicines for T2DM and other health conditions may need to be adjusted if a
person is taking an alternative treatment as drug-herb interactions may occur.
Popular supplements and evidence of benefits
• Clear scientific evidence supporting the benefit from all herbal, vitamin
and other supplementations for treatment and prevention of T2DM remain
scarce.
› Olive oil: When taken as supplementation or part of a Mediterranean diet,
has demonstrated favourable effects in reducing the risk of development
of T2DM in prediabetes and improvement in glycaemic control in T2DM by
0.27%.932 (Level I)
› Vitamin D: Although earlier observational studies have shown an
association between low level of vitamin D and increased risk for T2DM,
however, a recent RCT study on vitamin D supplementation failed to delay
progression to T2DM.933 (Level I)
› Vitamin E, 934 (Level I) cinnamon, 935 (Level I) curcumin: 936 (Level I) These have no
significant benefit on glycaemic control in patients with T2DM.
Note on acupuncture: Acupuncture has not been shown to improve glycaemic control in patients with
T2DM.
8.2 Reporting adverse events
• Healthcare professionals and consumers are encouraged to report any
adverse events related to products intended to treat or cure diabetes to the
Malaysian Adverse Drug Reaction Advisory Committee (MADRAC) at www.
npra.gov.my/index.php/en/health-professionals/reporting-adr937
Recommendations: Complementary and alternative therapy
1. Healthcare providers should enquire about the use of
CAM therapies in patients with prediabetes and T2DM. Grade C
2. Benefits from all herbal, vitamin and other
supplementations for treatment and prevention
of T2DM remain unclear.
Grade C
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE THERAPY IN T2DM
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
9.1 Guide to Key Performance Indicators (KPI)
• Over the years, the MOH has been monitoring processes and key indicators
(clinical and biochemical) – particularly in the public sector.
• The priority should be on coordinated care to maximise use of limited
resources.
• To analyse clinical outcomes that matter:
› the data should be collected and expressed as “outcomes per population”
by region (district, state, specified geographical region, national),
› results will allow for future re-strategizing where discrepancies and
imbalances exist. This is important for sharing of best practices that
contribute to achieving higher standards of care particularly in regions
performing below average.
› interventions to promote patient centred multi-level care (between
primary and secondary care; between different disciplines; between
private and public).
• The data collected should include parameters that fulfil the following:
› key clinical outcomes,
› easy to collect; and
› collected without the intervention of the direct stakeholders.
SUMMARY OF UPDATES
• This section has been revamped and focuses on key performance
indicators for management of T2DM.
• Two measures specific for KPIs and 3 measures for baseline data
collection have been introduced.
• The results will allow for future re-strategizing where discrepancies
and imbalances exist. It will also allow for sharing of best practices
contributing to achieving higher standards of care.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Figure 9-1: Key performance indicators for management of T2DM
Percentage of T2DM
patients (at >12- month
follow-up) with HbA1c
>8.5%
=
Number of T2DM patients with
HbA1c >8.5%
x 100%
Total number of T2DM (at
>12-month follow up) patients
attending the facility
*(Proposed Target: <20% for primary care & tertiary care)
Percentage of
patients screened for
complications
=
Number of patients screened for
complications x 100%
Total number of T2DM patients
attending the facility
*(Proposed Target: 75% for primary care & 90% for tertiary care)
*The targets are proposed based on existing data taking into account the practicality of the
recommendations and the reality of the current available resources and facilities.
9.2 Baseline data collection
The following are for data collection to enable future planning of T2DM care.
Figure 9-2: Baseline data collection
A. Number of new cases of patients with T2DM needing renal replacement
therapy (RRT) per year per 100000 total population.
No. of new cases of T2DM
needed RRT/year/100,000
total population
= No. of new T2DM cases needing RRT*
Total population
*Collected from public and private hospitals, and renal dialysis centres in that region for one year
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
B. Number of below knee amputations (BKA) in patients with T2DM per year
per 100000 total population.
No. of BKA in patients with
T2DM/year/100,000 total
population
= No. of BKA in patients with T2DM*
Total population
*Collected from the operating theatre of all private and public hospitals in that region for one year.
C. Number of severe hypoglycaemic admissions in patients with T2DM per
year per 100000 total estimated population with T2DM (based on latest
National Health and Morbidity Survey data).
No. of severe hypolycaemic
admissions in patients with
T2DM/year/100,000 total
population
=
No. of severe hypolycaemic admissions
in patients with T2DM*
Total estimated population with T2DM
*Collected from all private and public hospitals in that region for one year.
MALAYSIAN HEALTHY PLATE
APPENDIX 1
Adapted from Ministry of Health Malaysia, Nutrition Department.938 (Level III)
½ PLATE
Fruits and
vegetables
¼ PLATE
Fish, meats, nuts
or other protein
sources
¼ PLATE
Rice, noodles,
bread or others
carbohydrate
sources

CARBOHYDRATE CONTENT OF COMMON
MALAYSIAN FOODS
APPENDIX 2
Foods Serving
Calories
(kcal)
CHO
content (g)
Approx. CHO
exchanges*
Cooked rice 1 bowl (159 g) 207 48 3
Nasi lemak 1 small packet
(200 g) 338 51 3.5
Fried rice 1 plate (200 g) 386 53 3.5
Roti canai 1 piece (95 g) 301 46 3
Chappati 1 piece (100 g) 300 47 3
Curry mee 1 bowl (450 g) 549 55 4
Fried noodles
(mee/meehoon) 1 plate (200 g) 346 48 3
Bread (white/
wholemeal) 1 slice (30 g) 70 15 1
Biscuits,
unsweetened 2 pieces (18 g) 80 14 1
Kuih lapis 1 piece (100 g) 152 33 2
Curry puff 1 piece (40 g) 128 17 >1
Potato 1 medium (90 g) 90 16 1
Dhal (raw) ½ cup (98 g) 98 64 4
Full cream milk 1 cup (250 ml) 187 18 1
Low fat milk 1 cup (250 ml) 131 12 1
Skim milk
powder
4 tablespoons
(28 g) 100 16 1
Condensed milk,
sweetened
2 tablespoons
(40 g) 126 21 1.5
Tea with
condensed milk
(Teh tarik)
1 mug (250 ml) 220 36 >2
Coffee with
sugar (Kopi O) 1 mug (250 ml) 198 50 >3
Chocolate
flavoured
beverage
1 mug (250 ml) 277 46 3
Fruit flavoured
drink 1 glass (250 ml) 113 28 2
Tea with milk,
sugar and
tapioca balls
(Bubble tea)
1 small serving
(473 ml) 299 80 >5
Apple/orange 1 medium (114 g) 40 9 <1
Banana (pisang
mas) 1 small (50 g) 40 9 <1
Star fruit 1 medium (260 g) 56 11 1
Durian local 3 pieces, no seed
(189 g) 83 15 1
Langsat/grapes/
longan 8 small (233 g) 52 12 1
Guava ½ fruit (100 g) 50 11 1
Watermelon/
papaya/
pineapple
1 slice (160 g) 56 11 1
Mango 1 small (100g) 50 11 1
*1 CHO Food Exchange = 15 g; CHO = carbohydrate.
Sourced from Tee ES, et al. 1997, Suzana S et al. 2015, Min JE et al. 2017.939-941 (Level III)
APPENDIX 2
CARBOHYDRATE CONTENT OF COMMON MALAYSIAN FOODS
FOOD GROUPS AND EXCHANGE LISTS
APPENDIX 3
Cereals, Grain Products and Starchy Vegetables
(Each item contains 15 g CHO, 2 g protein, 0.5 g fat and 75 calories)
Cereals, Grain & Bread
Rice, white unpolished (cooked) ½ cup or ⅓ Chinese rice bowl
Can be exchanged with
Rice porridge 1 cup
Kway teow
½ cup or 1/3 Chinese rice bowl
Mee hoon
Tang hoon
Spaghetti
Macaroni
Mee, wet ⅓ cup
Idli 1 piece (60 g)
Putu mayam 1 piece (40 g)
Thosai, diameter 20 cm ½ piece
Chappati, diameter 20 cm ⅓ piece
Bread (wholemeal, high fibre,
white/brown) 1 slice (30 g)
Plain roll 1 small (30 g)
Burger bun ½ piece
Pita bread, diameter 6 inches ½ piece
Oatmeal, cooked ¼ cup
Oats, uncooked 3 rounded tablespoons
Muesli ¼ cup
Flour (wheat, rice, atta) 3 rounded tablespoons
Biscuits (plain, unsweetened)
e.g. cream crackers, Ryvita 3 pieces
Small thin, salted biscuits
(4.5 x 4.5 cm) 6 pieces
Starchy Vegetables
*Baked beans, canned ⅓ cup
*Lentils ⅓ cup
Can be exchanged with
Corn kernel (fresh/canned) ½ cup
Peas (fresh/canned) ½ cup
Sweet potato
½ cup (45 g)Tapioca
Yam
Breadfruit (sukun) 1 slice (75 g)
Pumpkin 1 cup (100 g)
Corn on the cob, 6 cm length 1 small
Potato 1 small (75 g)
Potato, mashed ½ cup
Water chestnut 4 pieces
*Contains more protein than other foods in the list i.e. 5 g/serve
1 cup = 200 mL in volume = ¾ Chinese rice bowl (11.2 cm in diameter x 3.7 cm deep)
Tablespoon refers to dessert spoon level (equivalent to 2 teaspoons)
Fruits
(Each item contains 15 g carbohydrate and 60 calories)
Fruits
Orange 1 medium
Can be exchanged with
Banana 1 small (60 g)
Apple
1 medium
Custard apple (buah nona)
Star fruit
Pear
Peach
Persimmon
Sapodilla (ciku)
Kiwi
Hog plum (kedondong) 6 whole
Mangosteen 2 small
Plum 2 small
APPENDIX 3
FOOD GROUPS AND EXCHANGE LISTS
Duku langsat
8 pieces
Grapes
Langsat
Longan
Water apple (jambu air), small
Lychee 5 whole
Rambutan 5 whole
Pomelo 5 slices
Papaya
1 slice
Pineapple
Watermelon
Soursop (durian belanda)
Guava ½ fruit
Cempedak 4 pieces
Jack fruit (nangka) 4 pieces
Prunes 3 pieces
Dates (kurma), dried 2 pieces
Raisin 20 g
Durian 2 medium seeds
Mango ½ small
Lean Meat, Fish and Meat Substitutes
(Each serving of meat and substitutes contain 7 g of protein. These foods contain
varying amounts of fat and energy, but negligible carbohydrate)
CHO (g) Protein (g) Fat (g) Energy (kcal)
Lean meat/Meat
substitutes 0 7 4 65
Fish/Shellfish 0 7 1 35
Lean Meat
Chicken (raw, without skin) ½ drumstick
Can be exchanged with
Lean meat (all varieties) 1 small serve (40 g)
Poultry (young) 40 g raw/30g cooked
Egg (hen) 1 medium
Soya bean curd (taukua) ½ piece (60 g)
Soya bean curd (soft, tauhoo) ¾ piece (90 g)
APPENDIX 3
FOOD GROUPS AND EXCHANGE LISTS
Soya bean curd, sheet (fucok) 1 ½ sheets (30 g)
Tempeh 1 piece (45 g)
Cheese, cheddar 2 thin slices (30 g)
Cottage cheese ¼ small cup
Fish / Shellfish
Fish (e.g. ikan kembong, selar) ½ piece (40 g)
Fish cutlet ¼ piece (40 g)
Squid 1 medium (40 g)
Crab meat
¼ cupLobster meat
Prawn meat
Cockles 20 small
Prawn 6 medium
Beans and lentils are good sources of protein but they also contain carbohydrate.
Milk
(Milk contains varying amount of carbohydrate, fat and protein depending on the types)
Fresh cow’s milk
1 cup (240 ml)
UHT fresh milk
Powdered milk (skim, full cream) 4 rounded tablespoons or 1/3 cup
Yogurt (plain/low fat) ¾ cup
Evaporated (unsweetened) ½ cup
Milk nutrient levels- 1 cup/240 ml
CHO (g) Protein (g) Fat (g) Energy (kcal)
Skimmed 15 8 Trace 90
Low fat 12 8 5 125
Full cream 10 8 9 150
APPENDIX 3
FOOD GROUPS AND EXCHANGE LISTS
Fat
(Each item contains 5 g of fat and 45 calories. Some of the foods in the list, e.g. nuts
and seeds also contain small amounts of carbohydrate and protein)
Oil (all types) 1 level teaspoon (5 g)
Can be exchanged with
Butter, margarine
1 level teaspoonMayonnaise
Shortening, lard
Peanut butter (smooth or crunchy) 2 level teaspoons
Cream, un-whipped (heavy)
1 level teaspoonCream cheese
Salad dressing
Cream, un-whipped (light)
2 level teaspoons
Coconut, shredded
Coconut milk (santan)
Non-dairy creamer, powder
Plum 2 small
Duku langsat 8 pieces
Almond 6 whole
Cashew nut 6 whole
Walnut 1 whole
Peanut 20 small
Sesame seed 1 level tablespoon
Watermelon seed (kuachi) with shell ¼ cup
Adapted from Malaysian Medical Nutrition Therapy Guidelines for T2DM, 2013.82 (Level III)
APPENDIX 3
FOOD GROUPS AND EXCHANGE LISTS
GLYCAEMIC INDEX OF FOODS
APPENDIX 4
Food
Category
Low GI
(<55)
Intermediate GI
(56-70)
High GI
(>70)
Rice Barley Basmati Rice
Brown rice
Parboiled rice
Red rice
Glutinous rice,
Jasmine rice
Instant porridge
White rice
Sago
Bread and
cereals
products
All bran breakfast
cereals
Muesli
Wholegrain bread
varieties
Capati
Idli
Oatmeal
Pita bread,
wholemeal
Wholemeal barley
flour bread
Cornflakes
Rice crackers
Roti Canai
White flour bread
Wholemeal (whole
wheat) wheat flour
bread
Noodle
and Pasta
Lasagna pasta
sheets, Spaghetti,
white, boiled
Spaghetti,
wholemeal, boiled
Spaghetti, white,
durum wheat
semolina
Udon noodles, plain
Wheat noodles
Fried macaroni
Fried meehoon
Fried rice noodles
Rice noodle (kuih
teow)
Milk Full fat milk
Low fat milk
Skim milk
Soymilk (without
added sugar)
Yogurt
Ice cream
Sweetened
condensed milk
Teh Tarik
Fruits Apple
Mango
Oranges
Plum
Banana
Dates
Papaya
Pineapples
Raisin
Lychee
Watermelon
Legumes Baked beans
Chickpeas
Lentils
Mung bean
Tubers Cassava, boiled
Sweet potato,
boiled
Pumpkins, boiled
Sweet corn, boiled
Potato, boiled
GI = glycaemic index.
Adapted from Atkinson FS et al. 2008, Foster-Powell K et al. 2002, Mohd Yusuf BN et al. 2008, Shanita
SN, et al. 2011, Robert SD, et al. 2008.942-946 (Level III)
ASSESSMENT PRIOR TO INTENSE EXERCISE
APPENDIX 5
General
assessment
• Elicit careful history and assess CV risk factors.
• Assess for conditions that might contraindicate certain
types of exercise or predispose to injury.
• Patient’s age and previous physical activity level
should be considered to customise exercise regimens
according to individual needs.
CVD • CV assessment should include a full history for CV
symptoms. Where there is concern, referral to a
cardiologist for further assessment is recommended.
• There is no evidence of benefit for screening of
asymptomatic patients, and adverse events are rare.
› In these patients, the most sensible approach is often
to start with short periods of low-intensity exercise,
and to increase both the intensity and the duration of
exercise slowly.
• CV assessment is recommended for patients
with autonomic neuropathy and/or albuminuria
(microalbuminuria/macroalbuminuria)
Peripheral
neuropathy
• For patients with peripheral neuropathy, it is vital to
ensure that appropriate footwear is worn and feet are
examined regularly.
• Weight-bearing exercise should be avoided in those
with active foot disease and severe neuropathy, but
moderate intensity walking may not increase the
risk of ulceration and improves outcomes in milder
neuropathy.
Retinopathy • Avoid vigorous intensity aerobic or resistance exercise
in presence of proliferative (or severe non-proliferative)
retinopathy because of the risk of vitreous
haemorrhage or retinal detachment.
• Consultation with an ophthalmologist prior to engaging
in an intensive exercise regimen may be appropriate.
DKD • There is no evidence for specific restriction of exercise.
• Importantly, CVD is increased in individuals with
albuminuria/DKD, so CV assessment is recommended
prior to exercise.
Plasma glucose • Check plasma glucose before exercise.
• If pre-exercise plasma glucose is low normal
(<5.6 mmol/L), advisable to take extra CHO before
exercise. This may not be necessary for short duration
exercise or for those who are not taking insulin or
insulin secretagogues.
CVD: cardiovascular disease; CV: cardiovascular; DKD: diabetic kidney disease; CHO: carbohydrate.
Adapted from the American Diabetes Association Standards for Medical Care in Diabetes 2020.6 (Level III)
APPENDIX 5
ASSESSMENT PRIOR TO INTENSE EXERCISE
GRADING OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES AND
METABOLIC EQUIVALENT TARGETS
APPENDIX 6
Moderate activities Strenuous activities
Faster walking (3-4.5 mph)
Race-walking, jogging or running
(5 mph-7 mph or approximately
8.0 km/hr-11.3 km/hr)
Cycling 5 to 9 mph, level terrain, or
with few hills,
Cycling uphill, >10 mph or
approximately >16 km/hr
Gardening and yard work: raking the
lawn, trimming shrubs and trees,
planting trees
Gardening and yard work such as
shovelling hay, digging ditches
and carrying heavy loads, swinging
an axe
Moderate housework: walking
downstairs, doing heavy laundry,
scrubbing the floor or bathtub while
on hands and knees
Climbing stairs while carrying
household items weighing 25 lbs
(11 kg) or more
Ballroom dancing, line dancing,
square dancing, folk dancing,
modern dancing, disco
Swimming- recreational, snorkelling
Swimming-steady paced laps, water
jogging, scuba diving
Badminton (non-competitive)
Playing singles tennis, squash,
racquet ball, football, soccer,
rugby, basketball
Aerobics (low impact) Jumping rope
Doing water aerobics
Canoeing or rowing, kayaking.
Playing doubles tennis
Mph: miles per hour; km/hr: kilometre per hour; lbs: pounds; kg: kilogram.
Metabolic equivalent targets (METS) are defined as:
Moderate Intensity: 50%-70% of a person’s maximum heart rate. (3.0-5.9 METs)
Vigorous / Strenuous Intensity: >70% of a person’s maximum heart rate. (≥6.0 METs)
The ratio of exercise metabolic rate. One MET is defined as the energy expenditure for sitting quietly,
which, for the average adult, approximates 3.5 ml of oxygen uptake per kilogram of body weight per
minute (1.2 kcal/min for a 70-kg individual). For example, a 2-MET activity requires two times the
metabolic energy expenditure of sitting quietly.
Muscle strengthening exercise or resistance exercise
Activities to increase muscle strength and endurance for minimum of 3 times
per week:
• Should be progressive
• Involving major muscle groups
• Repetitive
• e.g. Lifting weights – dumbbells or barbells
Adapted from American College of Sports Medicine Position Stand. Progression Models in Resistance
Training for Healthy Adults, 2009.947 (Level III)
APPENDIX 6
GRADING OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES AND METABOLIC EQUIVALENT TARGETS
DOSAGE OF GLUCOSE LOWERING DRUGS IN
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD)
APPENDIX 7
Generic Name Usual dose*
Dose adjustment in renal failure
Mild (CKD 2)
(GFR 60-89)
Moderate (CKD 3)
(GFR 30-59)
Severe (CKD 4 & 5)
(GFR <30)
Biguanide§
Metformin 500-1000 mg
BD Continue 50% dose
reduction Avoid
Sulphonylurea^
Glibenclamide 5 mg OD
-10 mg BD
Use with
caution Avoid
Gliclazide 80 mg OD
-160 mg BD No dose adjustment Caution
Gliclazide MR 30-120 mg OD No dose adjustment Caution
Glimepiride 1-6 mg OD Initiate with 1 mg OD ≥15:
Caution
<15:
Avoid
Glipizide 2.5 mg OD
-10 mg BD No dose adjustment Caution
Meglitinides
Repaglinide 0.5-4 mg TDS No dose adjustment Initiate at 0.5 mg
with meals
Alpha-glucosidase Inhibitor
Acarbose 25-100 mg
TDS 50-100% ≥25:
50-100%
<25:
Avoid
Thiazolidinediones
Pioglitazone 15-45 mg OD No dose adjustment (caution with fluid retention risk)
DPP4-i
Sitagliptin 100 mg OD No dose
adjustment
> 50: No dose
adjustment 25 mg OD30-<50:
50 mg OD
Vildagliptin 50 mg OD-BD No dose
adjustment
≥50: No dose adjustment
<50: 50 mg OD (limited data)
Saxagliptin 2.5-5 mg OD No dose
adjustment
>50: No dose adjustment
≤50: 2.5 mg OD
Linagliptin 2.5-5 mg OD No dose adjustment
APPENDIX 7
DOSAGE OF GLUCOSE LOWERING DRUGS IN CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD)
Generic Name Usual dose*
Dose adjustment in renal failure
Mild (CKD 2)
(GFR 60-89)
Moderate (CKD 3)
(GFR 30-59)
Severe (CKD 4 & 5)
(GFR <30)
GLP-1RA
Exenatide IR 5 μg/20 μL;
10 μg/40 μL
No dose
adjustment
>50: No dose
adjustment
Avoid30-50: Caution
in initiating or
escalating dose
from 5 to 10 mcg
Exenatide ER 2 mg weekly No dose
adjustment
>50: No dose
adjustment
Avoid
30-50: Use with
caution
Liraglutide
6 mg/mL No dose
adjustment
No dose
adjustment
≥15:
No dose
adjustment
<15:
Avoid
3 mg No dose
adjustment
No dose
adjustment Avoid
Lixisenatide 50 μg/mL;
100 μg/mL
No dose
adjustment
No dose
adjustment Avoid
Dulaglutide 0.75-1.5 mg
weekly
No dose
adjustment
No dose
adjustment
≥15:
No dose
adjustment
<15:
Avoid
Semaglutide 0.5-1.0 mg
weekly
No dose
adjustment
No dose
adjustment
≥15:
No dose
adjustment
<15:
Avoid
SGLT2 Inhibitors¶
Dapagliflozin 5-10 mg OD No dose
adjustment
45-60: No dose
adjustment
Avoid
<45: Not
recommended
Canagliflozin 100-300 mg
OD
No dose
adjustment
45-60: 100 mg OD
Avoid<45: Not
recommended
Empagliflozin 10-25 mg OD No dose adjustment Avoid
Ertugliflozin 5-15 mg OD No dose
adjustment
45-60: No initiation
Avoid< 45: Not
recommended
Luseogliflozin 2.5-5 mg OD No dose
adjustment
<60: Not
recommended Avoid
APPENDIX 7
DOSAGE OF GLUCOSE LOWERING DRUGS IN CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD)
Insulin
Doses should be adjusted based on frequent monitoring to balance goals of glycaemic
control with avoiding hypoglycaemia. Long-acting tends to accumulate longer than
short-acting insulin.
Dose escalation will depend on tolerability and according to the PI.
GFR in ml/min/1.73 m2; *usual dose not maximum dose.
^ Sulphonylureas should be used cautiously because of the increased risk of hypoglycaemia. First generation
sulphonylureas (e.g. glibenclamide): generally, should be avoided due to long half-life and risk of
hypoglycaemia in patients with CKD. Gliclazide and glipizide are the preferred agents among the secondgeneration sulphonylureas as they do not have active metabolites and have lower risk of hypoglycaemia
in CKD patients.
§ Metformin is eliminated via kidney and may accumulate in body as kidney function deteriorates, increase
risk of lactic acidosis.
¶SGL T2-i – eGFR below which this class of agents can be prescibed is expected to change, with the advent
of their significant reno-protective and cardio-protective benefits; however, the indication may be for
their reno and cardio-protective benefits rather than specifically for glucose lowering. At lower eGFR,
glucose-lowering efficacy of SGL T2-i are modest. Shown here are cut-offs based on individual agents’
registered indication in Malaysia.
CKD: chronic kidney disease; OD: daily; BD: twice daily; TDS: three times daily; GFR: glomerular filtration
rate; DPP4-i: Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors; GLP1-RA: glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists;
SGL T2-i: sodium-glucose transport protein 2 inhibitors.
Adapted from Malaysian Society of Nephrology. Management of Chronic Kidney Disease (2nd ed); 2018561
(Level III), Diabetes Canada 2018.40 (Level III)
CARDIOVASCULAR OUTCOMES TRIALS (CVOTS)
APPENDIX 8
(A) DPP4-i
CVOTs DPP4-i SAVOR-TIMI193 (Level I) EXAMINE948 (Level I) TECOS191 (Level I) CARMELINA192 (Level I) CAROLINA160 (Level I)
Trial participants (n) 16,492 5,380 14,671 6,979 6,033
Intervention Saxagliptin (QD)/
Placebo
Alogliptin (QD)/
Placebo
Sitagliptin (QD)/
Placebo
Linagliptin (QD)/
Placebo
Linagliptin (QD)/
Glimepiride
Main inclusion
criteria
T2DM and history
of or multiple risk
factors for CVD
T2DM and ACS
within 15-90 days
before randomisation
T2DM and
pre-existing CVD
T2DM and established
CV and/or
prevalent CKD
Early T2DM and
pre-existing CVD or
CV risk factors
Age (years)† 65.1 61.0 65.4 65.9 64.0
Diabetes
duration (years)† 10.3 7.1 11.6 14.8 6.3
Median follow-up
time (years) 2.1 1.5 3.0 2.2 6.3
Prior CVD/CHF (%) 78/13 100/28 74/18 57/26.8 34.7/4.6
Mean baseline
HbA1c (%) 8.0 8.0 7.2 8.0 7.2
Primary outcome
3-point MACE
1.00
(0.89-1.12)
p<0.001 for
non-inferiority;
p=0.99 for superiority
3-point MACE
0.96
(95% UL ≤1.16)
p<0.001 for
non-inferiority;
p=0.32 for superiority
4-point MACE
0.98
(0.89-1.08)
p<0.001 for
non-inferiority;
p=0.65 for superiority
3-point MACE
1.02
(0.89-1.17)
p<0.001 for
non-inferiority;
p=0.74 for superiority
3-point MACE
0.98
(0.84-1.14)
p<0.001 for
non-inferiority;
p=0.76 for superiority
CV death 1.03
(0.87-1.22)
0.79
(CI 0.60-1.04)
1.03
(0.89-1.19)
0.96
(0.81-1.14)
1.0
(0.81-1.24)
Non-fatal MI 0.95
(0.80-1.12)
1.08
(0.88-1.33)
0.95
(0.81-1.11)
(incl. fatal MI)
1.12
(0.90-1.40)
1.01
(0.80-1.28)
Non-fatal stroke 1.11
(0.88-1.39)
0.91
(0.55-1.50)
0.97
(0.79-1.19)
(incl. fatal stroke)
0.88
(CI 0.63-1.23)
0.88
(CI 0.63-1.23)
HF
hospitalisation
1.27
(1.07-1.51)
p=0.007
1.19
(0.90-1.58)
p=0.22
1.00
(0.83-1.20)
p=0.98
0.90
(0.74-1.08)
p=0.26
1.21
(0.92-1.59)
All-cause
mortality HR
1.11
(0.96-1.27)
0.88
(0.71-1.09)
1.01
(0.90-1.14)
0.98
(0.84-1.13)
p=0.74
0.91
(0.78-1.06)
Worsening DKD 1.08(a)
(0.88-1.32) _ _
1.04(b)
(0.89-1.22)
0.86(c)
(0.78-0.95)
p=0.003
† Age was reported as means in all trials except EXAMINE, which reported median; diabetes duration was reported as means in all trials except SAVOR- TIMI 53, EXAMINE and
CAROLINA which reported medians.
(a) Doubling of serum creatinine, initiation of dialysis, renal transplantation, or creatinine >6mg/dL
(b) Sustained ESRD, death due to kidney failure, or sustained decrease of ≥40% in eGFR from baseline
(c) Albuminuria progression
Range in parenthesis indicates 95% Confidence Interval.
CVOTs: cardiovascular outcomes trials; DPP4-i: Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors; CV: cardiovascular; CVD: cardiovascular disease; CHF: congestive heart failure; MI: myocardial
infarction; HF: heart failure; HR: hazard ratio; DKD: diabetic kidney diseases; QD: once daily; T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus; ACS: acute coronary syndrome; ASCVD:
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; MACE: major adverse cardiovascular events.
APPENDIX 8
CARDIOVASCULAR OUTCOMES TRIALS (CVOTS)
(B) SGLT2-i
CVOTs SGLT2-i EMPA-REG202 (Level I) CANVAS program201 (Level I) DECLARE-TIMI205 (Level I) VERTIS CV*952 (Level I)
Trial participants (n) 7,020 10,142 (4,330 & 5,812) 17,160 8,238
Intervention Empagliflozin (QD)/
placebo
Canagliflozin (QD)/
placebo
Dapagliflozin (QD)/
placebo
Ertugliflozin (QD)/
placebo
Main inclusion criteria T2DM and pre-existing
CVD
T2DM and pre-existing
CVD at ≥30 years of age or
≥2 CV risk factor at
≥50 years of age
T2DM and established
ASCVD or multiple risk
factors for ASCVD
T2DM and established
ASCVD
Age (years) 63.1 63.3 63.9 64.4
Diabetes duration
(years) 57% >10 13.5 11 13
Median follow-up time
(years) 3.1 2.4 4.2 3.0
Prior CVD/ CHF (%) 99/10.2 65.6/14.4 40/10 100/23
Mean baseline HbA1c (%) 8.1 8.2 8.3 8.2
Primary outcome
3-point MACE
0.86 (0.74-0.99)
p<0.001 for non-inferiority;
p=0.04 for superiority
3-point MACE
0.86 (0.75-0.97)
p<0.001 for non-inferiority;
p=0.02 for superiority
3-point MACE
0.93 (0.84-1.03)
p<0.001 for non-inferiority;
p=0.17 for superiority
CV death or HF
hospitalization
0.83 (0.73-0.95)
p=0.005 for superiority
3-point MACE
0.97 (0.85-1.11)
p<0.001 for non-inferiority
APPENDIX 8
CARDIOVASCULAR OUTCOMES TRIALS (CVOTS)
CV death
0.62
(0.49-0.77)
p<0.001
0.87
(0.72-1.06) 0.98
(0.82-1.17)
0.92
(0.77-1.11)
Non-fatal MI 0.87
(0.70-1.09)
0.85
(0.69-1.05)
0.89
(0.77-1.01)
1.04
(0.86-1.27)
Non-fatal stroke 1.24
(0.92-1.67)
0.90
(0.71-1.15)
1.01
(0.84-1.21)
1.01
(0.84-1.21)
HF hospitalisation
0.65
(0.50-0.85)
p<0.001
0.67
(0.52-0.87)
0.73
(0.61-0.88)
0.70
(0.54-0.90)
All-cause mortality HR
0.68
(0.57-0.82)
p<0.001
0.87
(0.74-1.01)
0.93
(0.82-1.04)
0.93
(0.80-1.08)
Worsening DKD
0.61(a)
(0.53-0.70)
p<0.001
0.60(a)
(0.47-0.77)
0.73(b)
(0.67-0.79);
0.53(c)
(0.43-0.66) 0.81(d)
(0.64-1.04)
† Age was reported as means in all trials; diabetes duration was reported as mean in CANVAS and VERTIS CV; EMPA-REG reported as percentage of population with DM
duration >10 yrs; DECLARE-TIMI 58, which reported median.
(a) Progression to macroalbuminuria, double of serum creatinine level, initiation of renal replacement therapy or death from renal disease
(b) ≥40% reduction in eGFR, renal-replacement therapy, or renal death
(c) ≥40% decrease in eGFR to <60 ml/min/1.73 m2, ESRD, or death from renal cause
(d) Doubling of serum creatinine, renal replacement therapy or death from renal causes
Range in parenthesis indicates 95% Confidence Interval.
*The hazard ratio for the primary outcome event is reported with a 95.6% confidence interval (adjusted to account for the interim analysis). The hazard ratio for key secondary
outcome events are reported with a 95.8% confidence interval (adjusted to account for the interim analysis). The hazard ratios for other secondary outcome events are
reported with a 95% confidence interval.
CVOTs: cardiovascular outcomes trials; SGL T2-i: sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors; CV: cardiovascular; CVD: cardiovascular disease; CHF: congestive heart failure;
MI: myocardial infarction; HF: heart failure; HR: hazard ratio; DKD: diabetic kidney diseases; QD: once daily; T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus; ACS: acute coronary syndrome;
ASCVD: atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; MACE: major adverse cardiovascular events.
APPENDIX 8
CARDIOVASCULAR OUTCOMES TRIALS (CVOTS)
(C) GLP1-RA
CVOTs GLP1-RA ELIXA238 (Level I) LEADER230
(Level I)
SUSTAIN-6259
(Level I)
EXSCEL224
(Level I)
HARMONY
outcomes671
(Level I)
REWIND248
(Level I)
PIONEER 6670
(Level I)
Trial participants (n) 6,068 9,340 3,297 14,752 9,463 9,901 3,183
Intervention Lixisenatide
(QD)
Liraglutide
(QD)
Semaglutide
(OW)
Exenatide
(QW)
Albiglutide
(OW)
Dulaglutide
(OW)
Semaglutide
Oral (QD)
Main inclusion criteria
T2DM and
history of
ACS
(<180 days)
T2DM and preexisting CVD,
CKD, or HF at
≥50 years of
age or CV risk
at ≥60 years
of age
T2DM and preexisting CVD,
HF, or CKD at
≥50 years of
age or CV risk
at ≥60 years
of age
T2DM with or
without
pre-existing
CVD
T2DM with
pre-existing
CVD
T2DM and
prior ASCVD
event or risk
factors for
ASCVD
T2DM and preexisting CVD,
HF or moderate
CKD at ≥50
years of age or
CV risk at ≥60
years of age
Age (years) 60.3 64.3 64.6 62.0 64.1 66.2 66.0
Diabetes duration
(years) 9.3 12.8 13.9 12.0 14.1 10.5 14.9
Median follow-up time
(years) 2.1 3.8 2.1 3.2 1.6 5.4 1.4
Prior CVD/ CHF (%) 100/22.4 81.3/17.9 83/23.6 73.1/16.2 100/20 31.4/8.6 84.7/12.2
Mean baseline HbA1c (%) 7.7 8.7 8.7 8.0 8.7 7.3 8.2
Primary outcome
4-point MACE
1.02
(0.89-1.17)
p=0.81
3-point MACE
0.87
(0.78-0.97)
p=0.01
3-point MACE
0.74
(0.58-0.95)
p<0.001 for
noninferiority;
p<0.02 for
superiority
3-point MACE
0.91
(0.83-1.00)
p=0.06
3-point MACE
0.78
(0.68–0.90)
p=0.0006
3-point MACE
0.88
(0.79-0.99)
p=0.026
3-point MACE
0.79
(0.57-1.11)
p<0.001 for
noninferiority,
p=0.17 for
superiority
APPENDIX 8
CARDIOVASCULAR OUTCOMES TRIALS (CVOTS)
CV death 0.98
(0.78-1.22)
0.78
(0.66-0.93)
0.98
(0.65-1.48)
0.88
(0.73-1.05)
0.93
(0.73-1.19)
0·91
(0·78-1·06)
0.49
(0.27-0.92)
Non-fatal MI 1.03
(0.87-1.22)
0.88
(0.75-1.03)
0.74
(0.51-1.08)
0.95
(0.84-1.09)
0.75
(0.61-0.90)
0·96
(0·79-1·16)
1.18
(0.73-1.90)
Non-fatal stroke 1.12
(0.79-1.58)
0.89
(0.72-1.11)
0.61
(0.38-0.99)
0.86
(0.70-1.07)
0.86
(0.66-1.14)
0·76
(0·61-0·95)
0.74
(0.35-1.57)
HF hospitalisation 0.96
(0.75-1.23)
0.87
(0.73-1.05) 1.11
(0.77-1.61)
0.94
(0.78-1.13)
0·85
(0·70-1·04)
[Composite
of CV death
or hHF]
0·93
(0·77-1·12)
0.86
(0.48-1.55)
All-cause mortality HR 0.94
(0.78-1.13)
0.85
(0.74-0.97)
1.05
(0.74-1.50)
0.86
(0.77-0.97)
0.95
(0.79-1.16)
0.90
(0.80-1.01)
0.51
(0.31-0.84)
Worsening DKD 0.81(a)
(0.66-0.99)
0.78(b)
(0.67-0.92)
0.64(c)
(0.46-0.88)
0.85(d)
(0.74-0.98)
Reported as
AEs
0·85(e)
(0·77-0·93)
Reported as
AEs
† Age was reported as means in all trials; diabetes duration was reported as means except EXSCEL, which reported median.
(a) New onset macroalbuminuria
(b) Nephropathy [defined as new onset macro-albuminuria or doubling of serum creatinine and eGFR ≤45 ml/min/1.73 m2, need for continuous renal-replacement therapy, or
death from renal disease
(c) Persistent macroalbuminuria, persistent doubling of serum creatinine and creatinine clearance per MDRD <45ml/min/1.73m2, need for continuous renal-replacement
therapy
(d) ≥40% decline in eGFR, renal replacement, renal death and new macroalbuminuria
(e) New macro-albuminuria, sustained decline in eGFR > 30% from baseline, or chronic renal replacement therapy
Range in parenthesis indicates 95% Confidence Interval.
CVOTs: cardiovascular outcomes trials; DPP4-i: Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors; CV: cardiovascular; CVD: cardiovascular disease; CHF: congestive heart failure; MI: myocardial
infarction; HF: heart failure; HR: hazard ratio; DKD: diabetic kidney diseases; QD: once daily; T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus; ACS: acute coronary syndrome; ASCVD:
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; MACE: major adverse cardiovascular events; MDRD: Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study.
APPENDIX 8
CARDIOVASCULAR OUTCOMES TRIALS (CVOTS)
FIBROSIS 4 INDEX
APPENDIX 9
(A) Use of Fibrosis-4 index in assessment of NAFLD
T2DM patient
Fibrosis-4 index
A liver biopsy may be
considered for definitive
diagnosis of NASH and/or
advanced liver fibrosis in
patients with persistently
elevated AL T and/or AST,
and/or elevated liver
stiffness measurement.
<1.3
<10 kPa
Unlikely to have
advanced liver
fibrosis
≥ 1.3
10-15 kPa
May have advanced
liver fibrosis
Requires
monitoring
Consider referral to
Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
>15 kPa
Likely to have
advanced liver
fibrosis
Consider referral to
Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
Consider HCC
surveillance
>20-25 kPa
Likely to have
clinically significant
portal hypertension
Should refer to
Gastroenterologist/
Hepatologist
Consider variceal
screening
Unlikely to have
advanced liver fibrosis
Liver stiffness
measurement
Elevated AL T and/or AST
US to diagnose fatty liver and exclude
focal liver lesion
Exclude other causes of elevated AL T/
AST
T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus; kPa: kilopascals; HCC; hepatocellular carcinoma; US: ultrasound; AL T:
alanine aminotransferase; AST: aspartate aminotransferase.
(B) Calculating Fibrosis 4 index
FIB-4 = Age (years) x AST (U/L)
Platelet count (x 109/L) x AL T (U/L)½
FIB-4 Interpretation
<1.3 Low risk for advanced fibrosis
≥1.3 Intermediate to high risk for advanced fibrosis
ASSESSMENT OF SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
APPENDIX 10
(A) The 5-item version of the international index of erectile function
1. How do you rate your
confidence that you could
get and keep an erection?
Very low Low Moderate High Very high
1 2 3 4 5
2. When you had erections
with sexual stimulation,
how often were your
erections hard enough for
penetration (entering your
partner)?
No sexual
activity
Never or almost
never
A few times
(much less than
half the time)
Sometimes
(about half the
time)
Most times
(much more
than half the
time)
Almost always
or always
0 1 2 3 4 5
3. During sexual intercourse,
how often were you able
to maintain your erection
after you had penetrated
(entered) your partner?
Did not attempt
intercourse
Never or almost
never
A few times
(much less than
half the time)
Sometimes
(about half the
time)
Most times
(much more
than half the
time)
Almost always
or always
0 1 2 3 4 5
4. During sexual intercourse,
how difficult was it to
maintain your erection to
completion of intercourse?
Did not attempt
intercourse
Extremely
difficult Very difficult Difficult Slightly difficult Not difficult
0 1 2 3 4 5
5. When you attempted
intercourse, how often was
it satisfactory for you?
Did not attempt
intercourse
Never or almost
never
A few times
(much less than
half the time)
Sometimes
(about half the
time)
Most times
(much more
than half the
time)
Almost always
or always
0 1 2 3 4 5
All questions are pertaining to the last 4 weeks
Total up all scores (maximum score = 25)
Classification of the Severity of ED:
Total score Classification
1-7 Severe
8-11 Moderate
12-16 Mild-to-moderate
17-21 Mild
22-25 No abnormality
(B) Sexual symptoms checklist for women
Sexual Symptom Checklist for Women
Please answer the following questions about your overall sexual function:
1. Are you satisfied with your sexual function? Yes / No
If No, please continue.
2. How long have you been dissatisfied with your sexual function? _________________
3. Mark which of the following problems you are having, and tick the one that is most bothersome:
• Little or no interest in sex
• Decreased genital sensation (feeling)
• Decreased vaginal lubrication (dryness)
• Problem reaching orgasm
• Pain during sex
• Other: ___________________________________________
4. Would you like to talk about it with your doctor? Yes / No
Adapted from Hatzichristou D et al. J Sex Med. 2010.764 (Level III)
APPENDIX 10
ASSESSMENT OF SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
IDF-DAR RISK CATEGORIES FOR PATIENTS
WITH T2DM WHO FAST DURING RAMADAN
APPENDIX 11
Risk
category Patient characteristics Comments
Category 1
Very high
risk
1 or more of the following:
1. Severe hypoglycaemia within
the 3 months prior to Ramadan
2. DKA within the 3 months prior
to Ramadan
3. Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic
coma within the 3 months prior
to Ramadan
4. History of recurrent
hypoglycaemia
5. History of hypoglycaemia
unawareness
6. Acute illness
7. Pregnancy in pre-existing
diabetes, or GDM treated with
insulin or SUs
8. Chronic dialysis or DKD stage 4
& 5
9. Advanced macrovascular
complications
10. Old age with ill health
If patients insist on
fasting then they
should:
√ Receive structured
education
√ Be followed by a
qualified diabetes
team
√ Check their blood
glucose regularly
(SMBG)
√ Adjust medication
dose as per
recommendations
√ Be prepared to
break the fast in
case of hypo- or
hyperglycaemia
√ Be prepared to stop
the fast in case of
frequent hypo- or
hyperglycaemia or
worsening of other
related medical
conditions
Category 2
High risk
1 or more of the following:
1. T2DM with sustained poor
glycaemic control*
2. Well-controlled T2DM on MDI
or mixed insulin
3. Pregnant T2DM or GDM
controlled by diet only or
metformin
4. DKD stage 3
5. Stable macrovascular
complications
6. Patients with comorbid
conditions that present
additional risk factors
7. People with diabetes
performing intense physical
labour
8. Treatment with drugs that may
affect cognitive function
Category 3
Moderate/
low risk
Well-controlled T2DM treated with
one or more of the following:
1. Lifestyle therapy
2. Metformin
3. Acarbose
4. TZDs
5. Second-generation SUs
6. Incretin-based therapy
7. SGL T2-i
8. Basal insulin
Patients who fast
should:
√ Receive structured
education
√ Check their blood
glucose regularly
(SMBG)
√ Adjust medication
dose as per
recommendations
DKA: diabetic ketoacidosis; GDM: gestational diabetes mellitus; SU: sulphonylurea; DKD: diabetic kidney
disease; T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus; MDI: mixed dose insulin; TZD: thiazolidinediones; SGL T2-i:
sodium-glucose transport protein 2 inhibitors; SMBG: self-monitoring blood glucose.
Adapted from the International Diabetes Federation–Diabetes and Ramadan International Alliance.
Diabetes and Ramadan: Practical Guidelines. 2016.
APPENDIX 11
IDF-DAR RISK CATEGORIES FOR PATIENTS WITH T2DM WHO FAST DURING RAMADAN
ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT OF TOBACCO
USE DISORDER
APPENDIX 12
ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT
1. Ask and document smoking status for all patients.
2. Provide brief advice on quit smoking at every visit to all smokers.
3. Assess level of nicotine addiction using Modified Fagerström Test for Cigarette
Dependence Questionnaire (COMPULSORY) and verify smoking status using
carbon monoxide (CO) breath analyser (IF AVAILABLE).
4. Offer pharmacotherapy to all smokers who are attempting to quit, unless
contraindicated.
5. If selected, use nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) for at least eight to twelve
weeks, whereas varenicline should be used for at least twelve weeks.
6. Combination therapy (e.g. two NRTs, a non-NRT, e.g. bupropion with an NRT)
is better than monotherapy in smoking cessation treatment and may be most
useful for those smokers at highest risk of relapse.
7. Use smoking cessation medications with caution in special populations (e.g.
children and adolescents, pregnant, breastfeeding women, psychiatric and
substance abuse disorder patients).
8. Arrange a minimum of six to eight face to face follow-up sessions for smoking
cessation interventions in six months through counselling support team (health
education officer, pharmacists or any officer trained for quit smoking services).
ABBREVIATIONS
ABG Arterial blood gas
ACCORD Action to Control
Cardiovascular Risk in
Diabetes Study
ACE Angiotensin converting
enzyme
ADI Adequate dietary intake
ADVANCE Action in Diabetes
and Vascular Disease:
Preterax and Diamicron
MR Controlled Evaluation
Study
AGIs Alpha-glucosidase
inhibitors
AHA American Heart
Association
ALT Alanine aminotransferase
ARB Angiotensin receptor
blocker
ASCEND A Study of Cardiovascular
Events iN Diabetes
ASCVD Atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease
AST Aspartate transaminase
BD Twice daily
BMI Body mass index
BP Blood pressure
BUSE Blood urea and serum
electrolytes
CABG Coronary artery bypass
graft
CAN Cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy
CARMELINA Cardiovascular and Renal
Microvascular Outcome
Study With Linagliptin
CAROLINA Cardiovascular Outcome
Study of Linagliptin
Versus Glimepiride in
Patients With Type 2
Diabetes
CCB Calcium channel blockers
CCF Congestive cardiac failure
CCM Chronic care
management
CGM Continuous glucose
monitoring
CHD Coronary heart disease
CHO Carbohydrate
CI Confidence interval
CKD-EPI CKD-epidemiology
CPG Clinical Practice
Guidelines
Cr-51-EDTA Chromium-51-EDTA
CSF Cerebrospinal fluid
CSII Continuous SC insulin
infusion
CV Cardiovascular
CVD Cardiovascular disease
CVOTs Cardiovascular Outcome
Trials
CXR Chest x-ray
DAN Diabetic autonomic
neuropathy
DBP Diastolic blood pressure
DCCT Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial
DKA Diabetic ketoacidosis
DKD Diabetic kidney disease
DPN Diabetic peripheral
neuropathies
DSPN Distal symmetric
polyneuropathy
ECG Electrocardiogram
ED Erectile dysfunction
eDKA Euglycaemic diabetic
ketoacidosis
ABBREVIATIONS
eGFR Estimated glomerular
filtration rate
EMPA-REG (Empagliflozin)
Cardiovascular Outcome
Event Trial in Type
2 Diabetes Mellitus
Patients
en energy
ER Extended release
ESKD End stage kidney disease
FBC Full blood count
FDC Fixed dose combination
FPG Fasting plasma glucose
FRS Framingham Risk Score
GCS Glasgow Coma Scale
GI Gastrointestinal
GIP Glucose-dependent
insulinotropic
polypeptide
GLD Glucose lowering drug
GLP-1 Glucagon-like peptide-1
GLP1-RA Glucagon-like peptide-1
receptor agonist
HbA1c Glycosylated
haemoglobin
HDU High dependency unit
HR Hazard ratio
ICU Intensive care unit
IFCC International Federation
of Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine
IFG Impaired fasting glucose
IGT Impaired glucose
tolerance
IM Intramuscular
IR Immediate release
IV Intravenous
kg Kilogram
KUB Kidney-ureter-bladder
LDL-C Low density lipoprotein
cholesterol
LOPS Loss of protective
sensation
MACE Major adverse
cardiovascular events
MDRD Modification of Diet in
Renal Disease
MI Myocardial infarction
MNT Medical nutrition therapy
MoH Ministry of Health
MRP Meal replacement
powder
NAFLD Non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease
NDR National Diabetes
Registry
NGSP National
Glycohemoglobin
Standardization Program
NPDR Non-proliferative diabetic
retinopathy
NSAIDs Non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs
NSTEMI Non-ST elevated
myocardial infarction
OD Daily
OGLD Oral glucose lowering
drug
OGTT Oral glucose tolerance
test
OM On morning
ONS Oral nutritional
supplements
OR Odd Ratio
OSA Obstructive sleep apnoea
PAD Peripheral arterial disease
PCI Percutaneous
intervention
POC Point of care
PPG Post-prandial glucose
QoL Quality of life
RAS Renin-angiotensin system
RCT Randomised control trial
RPG Random plasma glucose
RRT Renal replacement
therapy
SBP Systolic blood pressure
SC Subcutaneous
SCORE Systematic COronary Risk
Evaluation
SE Standard error
SGLT2-i Sodium–glucose
cotransporter 2 inhibitor
SMBG Self-monitoring blood
glucose
SR Slow release
SSB Sugar sweetened
beverages
SSI Sliding scale insulin
SU Sulphonylurea
T1DM Type 1 diabetes mellitus
T2DM Type 2 diabetes mellitus
TDS Three times daily
TG Triglycerides
TOSCA IT Thiazolidinediones Or
Sulphonylureas and
Cardiovascular Accidents
Intervention Trial
TZD Thiazolidinediones
UACR Urine albumin-tocreatinine ratio
UKPDS United Kingdom
Prospective Diabetes
Study
US Ultrasound
UTI Urinary tract infection
VEGF Vascular endothelial
growth factor
VLCD Very low calorie diet
VRIII Variable Rate Intravenous
Insulin infusion
ABBREVIATIONS
REFERENCES
1. National Health and Morbidity Survey 2019. Available at http://www.iku.gov.my/nhms/.
Accessed April 2020.
2. National Health and Morbidity Survey 2015. Available at http://iku.moh.gov.my/index.php/
research-eng/list-of-research-eng/iku-eng/nhms-eng/nhms-2015. Accessed May 2020.
3. Ministry of Health. National Diabetes Registry. Available at http://ndr.moh.gov.my/. Accessible
only to members.
4. The National Cardiovascular Database-Acute Coronary Syndrome (NCVD-ACS registry) report
2015-2016 report. Available at http://www.acrm.org.my/ncvd/reports_annualReports.php,
Accessed April 2020.
5. Malaysian Society of Nephrology, National Kidney Foundation. 24th Report of the Malaysian
Dialysis & Transplant Registry. 2016.
6. American Diabetes Association. Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2020;43(Suppl 1):S1-S212.
7. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus 5th edition. 2015.
8. Troisi RJ, Cowie CC, Harris MI. Diurnal variation in fasting plasma glucose: implications for
diagnosis of diabetes in patients examined in the afternoon. JAMA. 2000;284(24):3157-3159.
9. Hu Y, Liu W, Chen Y, et al. Combined use of fasting plasma glucose and glycated hemoglobin A1c
in the screening of diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance. Acta Diabetol. 2010;47(3):231-236.
10. Bonora E, Tuomilehto J. The pros and cons of diagnosing diabetes with A1C. Diabetes Care.
2011;34 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):S184-190.
11. Davidson MB, Schriger DL, Peters AL, Lorber B. Relationship between fasting plasma glucose
and glycosylated hemoglobin: potential for false-positive diagnoses of type 2 diabetes using
new diagnostic criteria. JAMA. 1999;281(13):1203-1210.
12. Carson AP, Reynolds K, Fonseca VA, Muntner P. Comparison of A1C and fasting glucose criteria
to diagnose diabetes among U.S. adults. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(1):95-97.
13. Colagiuri S, Lee CM, Wong TY, Balkau B, Shaw JE, Borch-Johnsen K. Glycemic thresholds for
diabetes-specific retinopathy: implications for diagnostic criteria for diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2011;34(1):145-150.
14. Kumar PR, Bhansali A, Ravikiran M, et al. Utility of glycated hemoglobin in diagnosing type 2
diabetes mellitus: a community-based study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95(6):2832-2835.
15. Nathan DM, Turgeon H, Regan S. Relationship between glycated haemoglobin levels and mean
glucose levels over time. Diabetologia. 2007;50(11):2239-2244.
16. Sabanayagam C, Khoo EY, Lye WK, et al. Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus using HbA1c in Asians:
relationship between HbA1c and retinopathy in a multiethnic Asian population. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2015;100(2):689-696.
17. Wan Nazaimoon WM, Md Isa SH, Wan Mohamad WB, et al. Prevalence of diabetes in Malaysia
and usefulness of HbA1c as a diagnostic criterion. Diabet Med. 2013;30(7):825-828.
18. Campbell L, Pepper T, Shipman K. HbA1c: a review of non-glycaemic variables. J Clin Pathol.
2019;72(1):12-19.
19. Haneda M, Noda M, Origasa H, et al. Japanese Clinical Practice Guideline for Diabetes 2016. J
Diabetes Investig. 2018;9(3):657-697.
20. National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP). Factors that Interfere with HbA1c Test
Results. 2014; http://www.ngsp.org/factors.asp. Accessed March 2020.
21. National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP). HbA1c Assay Interferences. 2014;
http://www.ngsp.org/interf.asp. Accessed March 2020.
22. National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP). Harmonizing Hemoglobin A1c Testing.
2010; http://www.ngsp.org/bground.asp. Accessed March 2020.
REFERENCES
23. Nathan DM, Genuth S, Lachin J, et al. The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the
development and progression of long-term complications in insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. N Engl J Med. 1993;329(14):977-986.
24. Stratton IM, Adler AI, Neil HAW, et al. Association of glycaemia with macrovascular and
microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 35): prospective observational study.
BMJ. 2000;321(7258):405-412.
25. Weykamp C, John W, Mosca A, et al. The IFCC Reference Measurement System for HbA1c: a
6-year progress report. Clinical Chemistry 2008;54(2):240-248.
26. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al. Management of Hyperglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes,
2018. A Consensus Report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care. 2018;41(12):2669-2701.
27. Martin C, Daly A, McWhorter LS, Shwide-Slavin C, Kushion W. The scope of practice, standards
of practice, and standards of professional performance for diabetes educators. Diabetes Educ.
2005;31(4):487-488, 490, 492 passim.
28. Beck J, Greenwood DA, Blanton L, et al. 2017 National Standards for Diabetes Self-Management
Education and Support. Diabetes Educ. 2017;43(5):449-464.
29. Funnell MM, Anderson RM, Austin A, Gillespie SJ. AADE position statement.
Individualization of diabetes self-management education. Diabetes Educ. 2007;33(1):45-49.
30. Dietitians Association of Australia, Australian Diabetes Educators Association. The role
of credentialled diabetes educators and accredited practising dietitians in the delivery of
diabetes self management and nutrition services for people with diabetes. 2015. Available at
https://daa.asn.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/ADEA-and-DAA-Joint-Statement-FINAL.pdf.
Accessed March 2020.
31. Lee SWH, Ng KY, Chin WK. The impact of sleep amount and sleep quality on glycemic control in
type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med Rev. 2017;31:91-101.
32. Smith SA, Poland GA. Use of influenza and pneumococcal vaccines in people with diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2000;23(1):95-108.
33. Buse JB, Wexler DJ, Tsapas A, et al. 2019 Update to: Management of Hyperglycemia in Type
2 Diabetes, 2018. A Consensus Report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care. 2020;43(2):487-493.
34. Turner RC, Holman RR, Stratton IM, et al. Tight blood pressure control and risk of macrovascular
and microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. BMJ. 1998;317(7160):703-713.
35. Gaede P, Oellgaard J, Carstensen B, et al. Years of life gained by multifactorial intervention in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and microalbuminuria: 21 years follow-up on the Steno-2
randomised trial. Diabetologia. 2016;59(11):2298-2307.
36. Gaede P, Lund-Andersen H, Parving HH, Pedersen O. Effect of a multifactorial intervention on
mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(6):580-591.
37. Norris SL, Lau J, Smith SJ, Schmid CH, Engelgau MM. Self-management education for adults
with type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of the effect on glycemic control. Diabetes Care.
2002;25(7):1159-1171.
38. Ellis SE, Speroff T, Dittus RS, Brown A, Pichert JW, Elasy TA. Diabetes patient education: a metaanalysis and meta-regression. Patient Educ Couns. 2004;52(1):97-105.
39. Gary TL, Genkinger JM, Guallar E, Peyrot M, Brancati FL. Meta-analysis of randomized educational
and behavioral interventions in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Educ. 2003;29(3):488-501.
40. Diabetes Canada Clinical Practice Guidelines Expert Committee. Diabetes Canada 2018 Clinical
Practice Guidelines for the Prevention and Management of Diabetes in Canada. Can J Diabetes.
2018;42(Suppl 1):S1-S325.
41. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Type 2 diabetes in adults: management.
2015. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng28/resources/type-2-diabetes-in-adultsmanagement-pdf-1837338615493. Accessed March 2020.
42. UNITE FOR DIABETES PHILIPPINES. Philippine Practice Guidelines on the Diagnosis and
Management of Diabetes Mellitus. 2014. Available at http://endo-society.org.ph/wp-content/
uploads/2013/06/Diabetes-United-for-Diabetes-Phil.pdf. Accessed March 2020.
43. Cosentino F, Grant PJ, Aboyans V, et al. 2019 ESC Guidelines on diabetes, pre-diabetes, and
cardiovascular diseases developed in collaboration with the EASD. Eur Heart J. 2020;41(2):255-323.
REFERENCES
44. Ministry of Health Singapore. Diabetes Mellitus. MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines. 1/2014.
Avialble at https://www.moh.gov.sg/docs/librariesprovider4/guidelines/cpg_diabetes-mellitusbooklet---jul-2014.pdf. Accessed March 2020.
45. Royal Australian College of General Practitioners. General practice management of type
2 diabetes. 2016-18. Available at https://www.racgp.org.au/FSDEDEV/media/documents/
Clinical%20Resources/Guidelines/Diabetes/General-practice-management-of-type-2diabetes_1.pdf. Accessed March 2020.
46. Beverly EA, Fitzgerald SM, Brooks KM, et al. Impact of reinforcement of diabetes self-care on
poorly controlled diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Educ. 2013;39(4):504-514.
47. Varney JE, Weiland TJ, Inder WJ, Jelinek GA. Effect of hospital-based telephone coaching on
glycaemic control and adherence to management guidelines in type 2 diabetes, a randomised
controlled trial. Intern Med J. 2014;44(9):890-897.
48. van Dam HA, van der Horst F, van den Borne B, Ryckman R, Crebolder H. Provider-patient
interaction in diabetes care: effects on patient self-care and outcomes. A systematic review.
Patient Educ Couns. 2003;51(1):17-28.
49. Ramli AS, Selvarajah S, Daud MH, et al. Effectiveness of the EMPOWER-PAR Intervention in
Improving Clinical Outcomes of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Primary Care: A Pragmatic Cluster
Randomised Controlled Trial. BMC Family Practice. 2016;17(1):157.
50. Si D, Bailie R, Weeramanthri T. Effectiveness of chronic care model-oriented interventions to
improve quality of diabetes care: a systematic review. Primary Health Care Research &amp;
Development. 2008;9(1):25-40.
51. Chin MH, Drum ML, Guillen M, et al. Improving and sustaining diabetes care in community
health centers with the health disparities collaboratives. Med Care. 2007;45(12):1135-1143.
52. Piatt GA, Orchard TJ, Emerson S, et al. Translating the Chronic Care Model Into the Community.
Results from a randomized controlled trial of a multifaceted diabetes care intervention.
2006;29(4):811-817.
53. International Diabetes Federation Clinical Guideline Task Force. Global Guideline for Type 2
Diabetes. 2012. Available at https://www.idf.org/e-library/guidelines/79-global-guideline-fortype-2-diabetes. Accessed March 2020.
54. Boule NG, Kenny GP, Haddad E, Wells GA, Sigal RJ. Meta-analysis of the effect of structured
exercise training on cardiorespiratory fitness in Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia.
2003;46(8):1071-1081.
55. Boule NG, Haddad E, Kenny GP, Wells GA, Sigal RJ. Effects of exercise on glycemic control
and body mass in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials. JAMA.
2001;286(10):1218-1227.
56. Skovlund SE, Peyrot M. The Diabetes Attitudes, Wishes, and Needs (DAWN) Program: A New
Approach to Improving Outcomes of Diabetes Care. Diabetes Spectrum. 2005;18(3):136-142.
57. Hill-Briggs F, Gemmell L. Problem solving in diabetes self-management and control: a systematic
review of the literature. Diabetes Educ. 2007;33(6):1032-1050; discussion 1051-1032.
58. Lustman PJ, Anderson RJ, Freedland KE, de Groot M, Carney RM, Clouse RE. Depression and poor
glycemic control: a meta-analytic review of the literature. Diabetes Care. 2000;23(7):934-942.
59. American Association of Diabetes Educators. The Art and Science of Diabetes SelfManagement Education Desk Reference, 4th edition. 2017. Chicago; Illinois.
60. Handelsman Y, Bloomgarden ZT, Grunberger G, et al. American association of clinical
endocrinologists and american college of endocrinology - clinical practice guidelines for
developing a diabetes mellitus comprehensive care plan - 2015. Endocr Pract. 2015;21 Suppl
1:1-87.
61. Community Preventive Services Task Force. Team-based care to improve type 2 diabetes
management: recommendaiton of the community preventive services task force. Am J Prev
Med 2019;57(1):e27-e29.
62. Pape GA, Hunt JS, Butler KL, et al. Team-based care approach to cholesterol management
in diabetes mellitus: two-year cluster randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med.
2011;171(16):1480-1486.
63. Siaw MYL, Lee JY. Multidisciplinary collaborative care in the management of patients with
uncontrolled diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Clin Pract. 2019;73(2):e13288.
REFERENCES
64. Siaw MYL, Malone DC, Ko Y, Lee JY. Cost-effectiveness of multidisciplinary collaborative care
versus usual care in the management of high-risk patients with diabetes in Singapore: Shortterm results from a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2018;43(6):775-783.
65. Taylor GW. Bidirectional interrelationships between diabetes and periodontal diseases: an
epidemiologic perspective. Ann Periodontol. 2001;6(1):99-112.
66. Graziani F, Gennai S, Solini A, Petrini M. A systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiologic
observational evidence on the effect of periodontitis on diabetes An update of the EFP-AAP
review. J Clin Periodontol. 2018;45(2):167-187.
67. Al-Harthi LS, Cullinan MP, Leichter JW, Thomson WM. The impact of periodontitis on oral
health-related quality of life: a review of the evidence from observational studies. Aust Dent J.
2013;58(3):274-277; quiz 384.
68. Che Salleh N, Yaw SL, Abd Muttalib K, et al. Preception and trends in referrla of diabetes
patients for dental care among healthcare workers (HCWs). Int J Healthc Sci. 2017;5(1):424-429.
69. Sahril N, Aris T, Mohd Asari AS, et al. Oral health seeking behaviour among Malaysians with
type II diabetes. Journal of Public Health Aspects. 2014;1(1).
70. Sanz M, Ceriello A, Buysschaert M, et al. Scientific evidence on the links between periodontal
diseases and diabetes: Consensus report and guidelines of the joint workshop on periodontal
diseases and diabetes by the International Diabetes Federation and the European Federation
of Periodontology. J Clin Periodontol. 2018;45(2):138-149.
71. The Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group (ACCORD). Effects
of Intensive Glucose Lowering in Type 2 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine.
2008;358(24):2545-2559.
72. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Managing blood glucose in adults
with type 2 diabetes. 2019. Available at http://pathways.nice.org.uk/pathways/type-2-diabetesin-adults. Accessed March 2020.
73. Franz MJ, Boucher JL, Green-Pastors J, Powers MA. Evidence-based nutrition practice guidelines
for diabetes and scope and standards of practice. J Am Diet Assoc. 2008;108(4 Suppl 1):S52-58.
74. Morrison F, Shubina M, Turchin A. Lifestyle counseling in routine care and long-term
glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol control in patients with diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2012;35(2):334-341.
75. Franz MJ, Powers MA, Leontos C, et al. The evidence for medical nutrition therapy for type 1
and type 2 diabetes in adults. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110(12):1852-1889.
76. Hamman RF, Wing RR, Edelstein SL, et al. Effect of weight loss with lifestyle intervention on
risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(9):2102-2107.
77. Raynor HA, Champagne CM. Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: Interventions
for the Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2016;116(1):129-147.
78. Franz MJ, VanWormer JJ, Crain AL, et al. Weight-loss outcomes: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of weight-loss clinical trials with a minimum 1-year follow-up. J Am Diet Assoc.
2007;107(10):1755-1767.
79. Look AHEAD Study Group. Eight-year weight losses with an intensive lifestyle intervention: the
look AHEAD study. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;22(1):5-13.
80. Qian F, Liu G, Hu FB, Bhupathiraju SN, Sun Q. Association Between Plant-Based Dietary Patterns
and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2019.
81. Wang PY, Fang JC, Gao ZH, Zhang C, Xie SY. Higher intake of fruits, vegetables or their fiber
reduces the risk of type 2 diabetes: A meta-analysis. J Diabetes Investig. 2016;7(1):56-69.
82. Malaysian Dietitians’ Association. Medical Nutrition Therapy Guidelines for Type 2 Diabetes
Mellitus. 2013.
83. Sun Q, Spiegelman D, van Dam RM, et al. White rice, brown rice, and risk of type 2 diabetes in
US men and women. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(11):961-969.
84. Seah JYH, Koh W-P, Yuan J-M, van Dam RM. Rice intake and risk of type 2 diabetes: the
Singapore Chinese Health Study. European Journal of Nutrition. 2019;58(8):3349-3360.
85. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Malaysian Dietary Guidelines. 2015.
86. Imamura F, O’Connor L, Ye Z, et al. Consumption of sugar sweetened beverages, artificially
sweetened beverages, and fruit juice and incidence of type 2 diabetes: systematic review,
meta-analysis, and estimation of population attributable fraction. BMJ. 2015;351:h3576.
REFERENCES
87. Pan A, Malik VS, Schulze MB, Manson JE, Willett WC, Hu FB. Plain-water intake and risk of type
2 diabetes in young and middle-aged women. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;95(6):1454-1460.
88. Ford CN, Weber MB, Staimez LR, et al. Dietary changes in a diabetes prevention intervention
among people with prediabetes: the Diabetes Community Lifestyle Improvement Program
trial. Acta Diabetol. 2019;56(2):197-209.
89. Neuenschwander M, Ballon A, Weber KS, et al. Role of diet in type 2 diabetes incidence:
umbrella review of meta-analyses of prospective observational studies. BMJ. 2019;366:l2368.
90. Raidl M, Spain K, Lanting R, et al. The healthy diabetes plate. Prev Chronic Dis. 2007;4(1):A12.
91. Raynor HA, Anderson AM, Miller GD, et al. Partial Meal Replacement Plan and Quality
of the Diet at 1 Year: Action for Health in Diabetes (Look AHEAD) Trial. J Acad Nutr Diet.
2015;115(5):731-742.
92. Chee WSS, Gilcharan Singh HK, Hamdy O, et al. Structured lifestyle intervention based on a
trans-cultural diabetes-specific nutrition algorithm (tDNA) in individuals with type 2 diabetes: a
randomized controlled trial. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care. 2017;5(1):e000384.
93. Wadden TA, West DS, Neiberg RH, et al. One-year weight losses in the Look AHEAD study:
factors associated with success. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009;17(4):713-722.
94. Pi-Sunyer X, Blackburn G, Brancati FL, et al. Reduction in weight and cardiovascular disease risk
factors in individuals with type 2 diabetes: one-year results of the look AHEAD trial. Diabetes
Care. 2007;30(6):1374-1383.
95. Lean ME, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al. Primary care-led weight management for remission of type
2 diabetes (DiRECT): an open-label, cluster-randomised trial. Lancet. 2018;391(10120):541-551.
96. Wheeler ML, Dunbar SA, Jaacks LM, et al. Macronutrients, food groups, and eating patterns
in the management of diabetes: a systematic review of the literature, 2010. Diabetes Care.
2012;35(2):434-445.
97. Juraschek SP, Miller ER, 3rd, Selvin E, et al. Effect of type and amount of dietary carbohydrate
on biomarkers of glucose homeostasis and C reactive protein in overweight or obese adults:
results from the OmniCarb trial. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care. 2016;4(1):e000276.
98. American Dietetic Association. Guide to Diabetes Medical Nutrition Therapy and Education.
Diabetes Care and education Dietetic Practice Group. Tamil Ross, Jackie Boncher and Belinda
O’Connell (eds).2005.
99. Evert AB, Boucher JL, Cypress M, et al. Nutrition Therapy Recommendations for the
Management of Adults With Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(Supplement 1):S120-S143.
100. DAFNE Study Group. Training in flexible, intensive insulin management to enable dietary
freedom in people with type 1 diabetes: dose adjustment for normal eating (DAFNE)
randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2002;325(7367):746.
101. Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy,
Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press; 2005.
102. Sheard NF, Clark NG, Brand-Miller JC, et al. Dietary Carbohydrate (Amount and Type) in the
Prevention and Management of Diabetes. A statement by the American Diabetes Association.
2004;27(9):2266-2271.
103. Malik VS, Schulze MB, Hu FB. Intake of sugar-sweetened beverages and weight gain: a
systematic review. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;84(2):274-288.
104. Malik VS, Popkin BM, Bray GA, Despres JP, Willett WC, Hu FB. Sugar-sweetened beverages
and risk of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care.
2010;33(11):2477-2483.
105. Thomas D, Elliott EJ. Low glycaemic index, or low glycaemic load, diets for diabetes mellitus.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009(1):Cd006296.
106. Liu AG, Most MM, Brashear MM, Johnson WD, Cefalu WT, Greenway FL. Reducing the glycemic
index or carbohydrate content of mixed meals reduces postprandial glycemia and insulinemia
over the entire day but does not affect satiety. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(8):1633-1637.
107. Brand-Miller J, Hayne S, Petocz P, Colagiuri S. Low-glycemic index diets in the management of
diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(8):2261-2267.
REFERENCES
108. Barakatun-Nisak MY, Ruzita AT, Norimah AK, Nor Azmi K, Fatimah A. Acute Effect of Low and
High Glycemic Index Meals on Post-prandial Glycemia and Insulin Responses in Patients with Type
2 Diabetes Mellitus. Malaysian Journal of Medicine and Health Sciences. 2009;5(1):11-20.
109. Ojo O, Ojo OO, Adebowale F, Wang XH. The Effect of Dietary Glycaemic Index on Glycaemia
in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized
Controlled Trials. Nutrients. 2018;10(3).
110. Korsmo-Haugen HK, Brurberg KG, Mann J, Aas AM. Carbohydrate quantity in the dietary
management of type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2019;21(1):15-27.
111. Gupta L, Khandelwal D, Kalra S, Gupta P, Dutta D, Aggarwal S. Ketogenic diet in endocrine
disorders: Current perspectives. J Postgrad Med. 2017;63(4):242-251.
112. Blau JE, Tella SH, Taylor SI, Rother KI. Ketoacidosis associated with SGL T2 inhibitor treatment:
Analysis of FAERS data. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2017;33(8).
113. American Diabetes Association. Lifestyle Management: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes.
2019. Diabetes Care. 42(Supplement 1):S46-S60.
114. Larsen RN, Mann NJ, Maclean E, Shaw JE. The effect of high-protein, low-carbohydrate diets
in the treatment of type 2 diabetes: a 12 month randomised controlled trial. Diabetologia.
2011;54(4):731-740.
115. Robertson L, Waugh N, Robertson A. Protein restriction for diabetic renal disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2007(4):Cd002181.
116. Van Horn L, McCoin M, Kris-Etherton PM, et al. The evidence for dietary prevention and
treatment of cardiovascular disease. J Am Diet Assoc. 2008;108(2):287-331.
117. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, et al. Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium
and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium Collaborative
Research Group. N Engl J Med. 2001;344(1):3-10.
118. Yeh GY, Eisenberg DM, Kaptchuk TJ, Phillips RS. Systematic review of herbs and dietary
supplements for glycemic control in diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(4):1277-1294.
119. Hartweg J, Perera R, Montori V, Dinneen S, Neil HA, Farmer A. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFA) for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008(1):Cd003205.
120. Montori VM, Farmer A, Wollan PC, Dinneen SF. Fish oil supplementation in type 2 diabetes: a
quantitative systematic review. Diabetes Care. 2000;23(9):1407-1415.
121. Schwingshackl L, Zahringer J, Nitschke K, et al. Impact of intermittent energy restriction on
anthropometric outcomes and intermediate disease markers in patients with overweight and
obesity: systematic review and meta-analyses. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2020:1-12.
122. Cho Y, Hong N, Kim KW, et al. The Effectiveness of Intermittent Fasting to Reduce Body Mass
Index and Glucose Metabolism: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Clin Med. 2019;8(10).
123. Welton S, O’Driscoll T, Madden S. Intermittent fasting and weight loss - systematic review. Can
Fam Physician 2020;66:117-125.
124. Lachance CC, Walter M, Severn M. CADTH Rapid Response Report: Summary with critical
appraisal for Intermitten fasteing for adults with type 2 diabetes: a review of the clinical
effectiveness and guidelines. 2019.
125. Chudyk A, Petrella RJ. Effects of exercise on cardiovascular risk factors in type 2 diabetes: a
meta-analysis. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(5):1228-1237.
126. Burstein R, Polychronakos C, Toews CJ, MacDougall JD, Guyda HJ, Posner BI. Acute reversal
of the enhanced insulin action in trained athletes. Association with insulin receptor changes.
Diabetes. 1985;34(8):756-760.
127. Bird SR, Hawley JA. Update on the effects of physical activity on insulin sensitivity in humans.
BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med. 2016;2(1):e000143.
128. King DS, Baldus PJ, Sharp RL, Kesl LD, Feltmeyer TL, Riddle MS. Time course for exerciseinduced alterations in insulin action and glucose tolerance in middle-aged people. J Appl
Physiol (1985). 1995;78(1):17-22.
129. Way KL, Hackett DA, Baker MK, Johnson NA. The Effect of Regular Exercise on Insulin
Sensitivity in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Diabetes Metab
J. 2016;40(4):253-271.
REFERENCES
130. Balducci S, Zanuso S, Nicolucci A, et al. Effect of an intensive exercise intervention strategy
on modifiable cardiovascular risk factors in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a
randomized controlled trial: the Italian Diabetes and Exercise Study (IDES). Arch Intern Med.
2010;170(20):1794-1803.
131. Church TS, Blair SN, Cocreham S, et al. Effects of aerobic and resistance training on
hemoglobin A1c levels in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2010;304(20):2253-2262.
132. Snowling NJ, Hopkins WG. Effects of different modes of exercise training on glucose control
and risk factors for complications in type 2 diabetic patients: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care.
2006;29(11):2518-2527.
133. Umpierre D, Ribeiro PA, Kramer CK, et al. Physical activity advice only or structured exercise
training and association with HbA1c levels in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and metaanalysis. JAMA. 2011;305(17):1790-1799.
134. Sattelmair J, Pertman J, Ding EL, Kohl HW, 3rd, Haskell W, Lee IM. Dose response
between physical activity and risk of coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis. Circulation.
2011;124(7):789-795.
135. Colberg SR, Sigal RJ, Yardley JE, et al. Physical Activity/Exercise and Diabetes: A Position
Statement of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(11):2065-2079.
136. Plockinger U, Topuz M, Riese B, Reuter T. Risk of exercise-induced hypoglycaemia in patients
with type 2 diabetes on intensive insulin therapy: comparison of insulin glargine with NPH
insulin as basal insulin supplement. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2008;81(3):290-295.
137. Larsen JJ, Dela F, Madsbad S, Vibe-Petersen J, Galbo H. Interaction of sulfonylureas and exercise
on glucose homeostasis in type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes Care. 1999;22(10):1647-1654.
138. Greenway FL. Severe hypoglycemia in the Look AHEAD Trial. J Diabetes Complications.
2016;30(5):935-943.
139. Gordon BA, Bird SR, MacIsaac RJ, Benson AC. Does a single bout of resistance or aerobic
exercise after insulin dose reduction modulate glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes? A
randomised cross-over trial. J Sci Med Sport. 2016;19(10):795-799.
140. van Dijk JW, Manders RJ, Tummers K, et al. Both resistance- and endurance-type exercise reduce
the prevalence of hyperglycaemia in individuals with impaired glucose tolerance and in insulintreated and non-insulin-treated type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetologia. 2012;55(5):1273-1282.
141. Terada T, Wilson BJ, Myette-Cote E, et al. Targeting specific interstitial glycemic parameters
with high-intensity interval exercise and fasted-state exercise in type 2 diabetes. Metabolism.
2016;65(5):599-608.
142. Zheng X, Qi Y, Bi L, et al. Effects of Exercise on Blood Glucose and Glycemic Variability in Type 2
Diabetic Patients with Dawn Phenomenon. Biomed Res Int. 2020;2020:6408724.
143. Sigal RJ, Armstrong MJ, Bacon SL, et al. Physical Activity and Diabetes. Can J Diabetes. 2018;42
Suppl 1:S54-s63.
144. Saenz A, Fernandez-Esteban I, Mataix A, Ausejo M, Roque M, Moher D. Metformin
monotherapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005(3):Cd002966.
145. Hirst JA, Farmer AJ, Ali R, Roberts NW, Stevens RJ. Quantifying the Effect of Metformin
Treatment and Dose on Glycemic Control. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(2):446-454.
146. Reinstatler L, Qi YP, Williamson RS, Garn JV, Oakley GP, Jr. Association of biochemical B₁₂
deficiency with metformin therapy and vitamin B₁₂ supplements: the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2006. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(2):327-333.
147. Salpeter SR, Greyber E, Pasternak GA, Salpeter Posthumous EE. Risk of fatal and nonfatal
lactic acidosis with metformin use in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2010(1):Cd002967.
148. Domecq JP, Prutsky G, Leppin A, et al. Clinical review: Drugs commonly associated with weight
change: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(2):363-370.
149. Glueck CJ, Salehi M, Sieve L, Wang P. Growth, motor, and social development in breast- and
formula-fed infants of metformin-treated women with polycystic ovary syndrome. J Pediatr.
2006;148(5):628-632.
150. Glatstein MM, Djokanovic N, Garcia-Bournissen F, Finkelstein Y, Koren G. Use of hypoglycemic
drugs during lactation. Can Fam Physician. 2009;55(4):371-373.
REFERENCES
151. Hirst JA, Farmer AJ, Dyar A, Lung TW, Stevens RJ. Estimating the effect of sulfonylurea on
HbA1c in diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia. 2013;56(5):973-984.
152. Phung OJ, Scholle JM, Talwar M, Coleman CI. Effect of noninsulin antidiabetic drugs added
to metformin therapy on glycemic control, weight gain, and hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes.
JAMA. 2010;303(14):1410-1418.
153. Moen MF, Zhan M, Hsu VD, et al. Frequency of hypoglycemia and its significance in chronic
kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;4(6):1121-1127.
154. Landman GW, de Bock GH, van Hateren KJ, et al. Safety and efficacy of gliclazide as treatment
for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. PLoS One.
2014;9(2):e82880.
155. Schernthaner G, Grimaldi A, Di Mario U, et al. GUIDE study: double-blind comparison of once-daily
gliclazide MR and glimepiride in type 2 diabetic patients. Eur J Clin Invest. 2004;34(8):535-542.
156. Tayek J. SUR receptor activity vs. incidence of hypoglycaemia and cardiovascular mortality with
sulphonylurea therapy for diabetics. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2008;10(11):1128-1129; author reply
1129-1130.
157. Harinder C for WHO Secretariat. Glibenclamide (Review) – Adults. 19th Expert Committee on
the Selection and Use of Essential Medicines. Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO);2013.
158. Forkin KT, Huffmyer JL, Nemergut EC. 35 – Endocrine Physiology. In: Hemmings HC, Egan
TD, eds. Pharmacology and Physiology for Anesthesia (Second Edition). Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019:693-707.
159. Vaccaro O, Masulli M, Nicolucci A, et al. Effects on the incidence of cardiovascular events of
the addition of pioglitazone versus sulfonylureas in patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately
controlled with metformin (TOSCA.IT): a randomised, multicentre trial. The Lancet Diabetes &
Endocrinology. 2017;5(11):887-897.
160. Rosenstock J, Kahn SE, Johansen OE, et al. Effect of Linagliptin vs Glimepiride on Major
Adverse Cardiovascular Outcomes in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes: The CAROLINA
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2019;322(12):1155–1166.
161. Black C, Donnelly P, McIntyre L, Royle PL, Shepherd JP, Thomas S. Meglitinide analogues for
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007(2):Cd004654.
162. Niemi M, Backman JT, Neuvonen M, Neuvonen PJ. Effects of gemfibrozil, itraconazole, and
their combination on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of repaglinide: potentially
hazardous interaction between gemfibrozil and repaglinide. Diabetologia. 2003;46(3):347-351.
163. Chiasson JL, Josse RG, Hunt JA, et al. The efficacy of acarbose in the treatment of patients
with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. A multicenter controlled clinical trial. Ann Intern
Med. 1994;121(12):928-935.
164. Coleman RL, Scott CAB, Lang Z, Bethel MA, Tuomilehto J, Holman RR. Meta-analysis of the
impact of alpha-glucosidase inhibitors on incident diabetes and cardiovascular outcomes.
Cardiovascular Diabetology. 2019;18(1):135.
165. Holman RR, Coleman RL, Chan JCN, et al. Effects of acarbose on cardiovascular and diabetes
outcomes in patients with coronary heart disease and impaired glucose tolerance (ACE): a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(11):877-886.
166. Zhang W, Kim D, Philip E, et al. A Multinational, Observational Study to Investigate the Efficacy,
Safety and Tolerability of Acarbose as Add-On or Monotherapy in a Range of Patients: The GlucoVIP
Study. Clinical Drug Investigation. 2013;33(4):263-274.
167. Richter B, Bandeira-Echtler E, Bergerhoff K, Clar C, Ebrahim SH. Pioglitazone for type 2
diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006(4):Cd006060.
168. Richter B, Bandeira-Echtler E, Bergerhoff K, Clar C, Ebrahim SH. Rosiglitazone for type 2
diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007(3):Cd006063.
169. Kahn SE, Haffner SM, Heise MA, et al. Glycemic durability of rosiglitazone, metformin, or
glyburide monotherapy. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(23):2427-2443.
170. Loke YK, Kwok CS, Singh S. Comparative cardiovascular effects of thiazolidinediones: systematic
review and meta-analysis of observational studies. BMJ. 2011;342:d1309.
171. Schwartz AV, Sellmeyer DE, Vittinghoff E, et al. Thiazolidinedione use and bone loss in older
diabetic adults. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91(9):3349-3354.
172. Zhu ZN, Jiang YF, Ding T. Risk of fracture with thiazolidinediones: an updated meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. Bone. 2014;68:115-123.
REFERENCES
173. Satirapoj B, Watanakijthavonkul K, Supasyndh O. Safety and efficacy of low dose pioglitazone
compared with standard dose pioglitazone in type 2 diabetes with chronic kidney disease: A
randomized controlled trial. PLoS One. 2018;13(10):e0206722.
174. Nauck MA, Homberger E, Siegel EG, et al. Incretin effects of increasing glucose loads in
man calculated from venous insulin and C-peptide responses. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
1986;63(2):492-498.
175. Bagger JI, Knop FK, Lund A, Vestergaard H, Holst JJ, Vilsboll T. Impaired regulation of the
incretin effect in patients with type 2 diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96(3):737-745.
176. Gutzwiller JP, Drewe J, Goke B, et al. Glucagon-like peptide-1 promotes satiety and reduces
food intake in patients with diabetes mellitus type 2. Am J Physiol. 1999;276(5):R1541-1544.
177. Nauck MA, Vardarli I, Deacon CF, Holst JJ, Meier JJ. Secretion of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)
in type 2 diabetes: what is up, what is down? Diabetologia. 2011;54(1):10-18.
178. Muscelli E, Casolaro A, Gastaldelli A, et al. Mechanisms for the Antihyperglycemic Effect of
Sitagliptin in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism.
2012;97(8):2818-2826.
179. Rauch T, Graefe-Mody U, Deacon CF, et al. Linagliptin increases incretin levels, lowers glucagon,
and improves glycemic control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Ther. 2012;3(1):10.
180. Barnett AH, Patel S, Harper R, et al. Linagliptin monotherapy in type 2 diabetes patients
for whom metformin is inappropriate: an 18-week randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled phase III trial with a 34-week active-controlled extension. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2012;14(12):1145-1154.
181. Nonaka K, Kakikawa T, Sato A, et al. Efficacy and safety of sitagliptin monotherapy in Japanese
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2008;79(2):291-298.
182. Raz I, Hanefeld M, Xu L, Caria C, Williams-Herman D, Khatami H. Efficacy and safety of the
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor sitagliptin as monotherapy in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Diabetologia. 2006;49(11):2564-2571.
183. Rosenstock J, Aguilar-Salinas C, Klein E, Nepal S, List J, Chen R. Effect of saxagliptin
monotherapy in treatment-naive patients with type 2 diabetes. Curr Med Res Opin.
2009;25(10):2401-2411.
184. Rosenstock J, Baron MA, Dejager S, Mills D, Schweizer A. Comparison of Vildagliptin and
Rosiglitazone Monotherapy in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes. A 24-week, double-blind,
randomized trial. 2007;30(2):217-223.
185. Rosenstock J, Wilson C, Fleck P. Alogliptin versus glipizide monotherapy in elderly type 2
diabetes mellitus patients with mild hyperglycaemia: a prospective, double-blind, randomized,
1-year study. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2013;15(10):906-914.
186. Cook W, Minervini G, Bryzinski B, Hirshberg B. Saxagliptin efficacy and safety in patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus stratified by cardiovascular disease history and cardiovascular risk
factors: analysis of 3 clinical trials. Postgrad Med. 2014;126(6):19-32.
187. DeFronzo RA, Fleck PR, Wilson CA, Mekki Q. Efficacy and safety of the dipeptidyl peptidase-4
inhibitor alogliptin in patients with type 2 diabetes and inadequate glycemic control: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(12):2315-2317.
188. Ferrannini E, Fonseca V, Zinman B, et al. Fifty-two-week efficacy and safety of vildagliptin vs.
glimepiride in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus inadequately controlled on metformin
monotherapy. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2009;11(2):157-166.
189. Nauck MA, Meininger G, Sheng D, Terranella L, Stein PP. Efficacy and safety of the dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 inhibitor, sitagliptin, compared with the sulfonylurea, glipizide, in patients with
type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled on metformin alone: a randomized, double-blind, noninferiority trial. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2007;9(2):194-205.
190. Owens DR, Swallow R, Dugi KA, Woerle HJ. Efficacy and safety of linagliptin in persons with
type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled by a combination of metformin and sulphonylurea: a
24-week randomized study. Diabet Med. 2011;28(11):1352-1361.
191. Green JB, Bethel MA, Armstrong PW, et al. Effect of Sitagliptin on Cardiovascular Outcomes in
Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(3):232-242.
192. Rosenstock J, Perkovic V, Johansen OE, et al. Effect of Linagliptin vs Placebo on Major
Cardiovascular Events in Adults With Type 2 Diabetes and High Cardiovascular and Renal Risk:
The CARMELINA Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2019;321(1):69-79.
REFERENCES
193. Scirica BM, Bhatt DL, Braunwald E, et al. Saxagliptin and cardiovascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(14):1317-1326.
194. Matthews DR, Paldánius PM, Proot P, Chiang Y, Stumvoll M, Del Prato S. Glycaemic durability
of an early combination therapy with vildagliptin and metformin versus sequential metformin
monotherapy in newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes (VERIFY): a 5-year, multicentre, randomised,
double-blind trial. The Lancet. 2019;394(10208):1519-1529.
195. Clar C, Gill JA, Court R, Waugh N. Systematic review of SGL T2 receptor inhibitors in dual or
triple therapy in type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open. 2012;2(5).
196. Liakos A, Karagiannis T, Athanasiadou E, et al. Efficacy and safety of empagliflozin for type 2
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2014;16(10):984-993.
197. Vasilakou D, Karagiannis T, Athanasiadou E, et al. Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors for
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159(4):262-274.
198. Yang XP, Lai D, Zhong XY, Shen HP, Huang YL. Efficacy and safety of canagliflozin in
subjects with type 2 diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Clin Pharmacol.
2014;70(10):1149-1158.
199. Pinto LC, Rados DV, Remonti LR, Kramer CK, Leitao CB, Gross JL. Efficacy of SGL T2 inhibitors
in glycemic control, weight loss and blood pressure reduction: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Diabetology & Metabolic Syndrome. 2015;7(Suppl 1):A58-A58.
200. Brunton SA. The potential role of sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors in the early
treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Int J Clin Pract. 2015;69(10):1071-1087.
201. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. Canagliflozin and Cardiovascular and Renal Events in
Type 2 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2017;377(7):644-657.
202. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin, Cardiovascular Outcomes, and Mortality in
Type 2 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015;373(22):2117-2128.
203. Fitchett D, Zinman B, Wanner C, et al. Heart failure outcomes with empagliflozin in patients
with type 2 diabetes at high cardiovascular risk: results of the EMPA-REG OUTCOME(R) trial.
Eur Heart J. 2016;37(19):1526-1534.
204. Radholm K, Figtree G, Perkovic V, et al. Canagliflozin and Heart Failure in Type 2 Diabetes
Mellitus: Results From the CANVAS Program. Circulation. 2018;138(5):458-468.
205. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al. Dapagliflozin and Cardiovascular Outcomes in Type 2
Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2018;380(4):347-357.
206. McMurray JJV, Solomon SD, Inzucchi SE, et al. Dapagliflozin in Patients with Heart Failure and
Reduced Ejection Fraction. New England Journal of Medicine. 2019;381(21):1995-2008.
207. US Food and Drug Administration. FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA revises label of
diabetes drug canagliflozin (Invokana, Invokamet) to include updates on bone fracture risk and
new information on decreased bone mineral density. Safety Announcement 2015; http://www.
fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm461449.htm.
208. Iltz JL, Baker DE, Setter SM, Keith Campbell R. Exenatide: an incretin mimetic for the treatment
of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin Ther. 2006;28(5):652-665.
209. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al. Canagliflozin and Renal Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes
and Nephropathy. New England Journal of Medicine. 2019;380(24):2295-2306.
210. Shyangdan DS, Royle P, Clar C, Sharma P, Waugh N, Snaith A. Glucagon-like peptide analogues
for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011(10):Cd006423.
211. Rosenstock J, Ferrannini E. Euglycemic Diabetic Ketoacidosis: A Predictable, Detectable, and
Preventable Safety Concern With SGL T2 Inhibitors. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(9):1638-1642.
212. Moretto TJ, Milton DR, Ridge TD, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of exenatide monotherapy over
24 weeks in antidiabetic drug-naive patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, parallel-group study. Clin Ther. 2008;30(8):1448-1460.
213. Madsbad S. Review of head-to-head comparisons of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists.
Diabetes Obes Metab. 2016;18(4):317-332.
214. Meier JJ. GLP-1 receptor agonists for individualized treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Nat
Rev Endocrinol. 2012;8(12):728-742.
REFERENCES
215. Bettge K, Kahle M, Abd El Aziz MS, Meier JJ, Nauck MA. Occurrence of nausea, vomiting
and diarrhoea reported as adverse events in clinical trials studying glucagon-like peptide-1
receptor agonists: A systematic analysis of published clinical trials. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2017;19(3):336-347.
216. Russell-Jones D, Cuddihy RM, Hanefeld M, et al. Efficacy and safety of exenatide once
weekly versus metformin, pioglitazone, and sitagliptin used as monotherapy in drug-naive
patients with type 2 diabetes (DURATION-4): a 26-week double-blind study. Diabetes Care.
2012;35(2):252-258.
217. Bergenstal RM, Wysham C, Macconell L, et al. Efficacy and safety of exenatide once weekly
versus sitagliptin or pioglitazone as an adjunct to metformin for treatment of type 2 diabetes
(DURATION-2): a randomised trial. Lancet. 2010;376(9739):431-439.
218. Diamant M, Van Gaal L, Stranks S, et al. Once weekly exenatide compared with insulin glargine
titrated to target in patients with type 2 diabetes (DURATION-3): an open-label randomised
trial. Lancet. 2010;375(9733):2234-2243.
219. Frias JP, Guja C, Hardy E, et al. Exenatide once weekly plus dapagliflozin once daily versus
exenatide or dapagliflozin alone in patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled
with metformin monotherapy (DURATION-8): a 28 week, multicentre, double-blind, phase 3,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4(12):1004-1016.
220. Guja C, Frias JP, Somogyi A, et al. Effect of exenatide QW or placebo, both added to titrated
insulin glargine, in uncontrolled type 2 diabetes: The DURATION-7 randomized study. Diabetes
Obes Metab. 2018;20(7):1602-1614.
221. Buse JB, Henry RR, Han J, Kim DD, Fineman MS, Baron AD. Effects of exenatide (exendin-4) on
glycemic control over 30 weeks in sulfonylurea-treated patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes
Care. 2004;27(11):2628-2635.
222. DeFronzo RA, Ratner RE, Han J, Kim DD, Fineman MS, Baron AD. Effects of exenatide
(exendin-4) on glycemic control and weight over 30 weeks in metformin-treated patients with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(5):1092-1100.
223. Kendall DM, Riddle MC, Rosenstock J, et al. Effects of exenatide (exendin-4) on glycemic
control over 30 weeks in patients with type 2 diabetes treated with metformin and a
sulfonylurea. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(5):1083-1091.
224. Holman RR, Bethel MA, Mentz RJ, et al. Effects of Once-Weekly Exenatide on Cardiovascular
Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2017;377(13):1228-1239.
225. Garber A, Henry R, Ratner R, et al. Liraglutide versus glimepiride monotherapy for type 2
diabetes (LEAD-3 Mono): a randomised, 52-week, phase III, double-blind, parallel-treatment
trial. Lancet. 2009;373(9662):473-481.
226. Russell-Jones D, Vaag A, Schmitz O, et al. Liraglutide vs insulin glargine and placebo in
combination with metformin and sulfonylurea therapy in type 2 diabetes mellitus (LEAD-5
met+SU): a randomised controlled trial. Diabetologia. 2009;52(10):2046-2055.
227. Nauck M, Frid A, Hermansen K, et al. Efficacy and safety comparison of liraglutide, glimepiride,
and placebo, all in combination with metformin, in type 2 diabetes: the LEAD (liraglutide effect
and action in diabetes)-2 study. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(1):84-90.
228. Vilsboll T, Zdravkovic M, Le-Thi T, et al. Liraglutide, a long-acting human glucagon-like
peptide-1 analog, given as monotherapy significantly improves glycemic control and lowers
body weight without risk of hypoglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2007;30(6):1608-1610.
229. Eng C, Kramer CK, Zinman B, Retnakaran R. Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist and basal
insulin combination treatment for the management of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet. 2014;384(9961):2228-2234.
230. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, et al. Liraglutide and Cardiovascular Outcomes in Type
2 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2016;375(4):311-322.
231. Pinget M, Goldenberg R, Niemoeller E, Muehlen-Bartmer I, Guo H, Aronson R. Efficacy and
safety of lixisenatide once daily versus placebo in type 2 diabetes insufficiently controlled on
pioglitazone (GetGoal-P). Diabetes Obes Metab. 2013;15(11):1000-1007.
232. Riddle MC, Aronson R, Home P, et al. Adding once-daily lixisenatide for type 2 diabetes
inadequately controlled by established basal insulin: a 24-week, randomized, placebo-controlled
comparison (GetGoal-L). Diabetes Care. 2013;36(9):2489-2496.
REFERENCES
233. Aroda VR, Rosenstock J, Wysham C, et al. Efficacy and Safety of LixiLan, a Titratable FixedRatio Combination of Insulin Glargine Plus Lixisenatide in Type 2 Diabetes Inadequately
Controlled on Basal Insulin and Metformin: The LixiLan-L Randomized Trial. Diabetes Care.
2016;39(11):1972-1980.
234. Rosenstock J, Aronson R, Grunberger G, et al. Benefits of LixiLan, a Titratable Fixed-Ratio
Combination of Insulin Glargine Plus Lixisenatide, Versus Insulin Glargine and Lixisenatide
Monocomponents in Type 2 Diabetes Inadequately Controlled on Oral Agents: The LixiLan-O
Randomized Trial. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(11):2026-2035.
235. Rosenstock J, Diamant M, Aroda VR, et al. Efficacy and Safety of LixiLan, a Titratable FixedRatio Combination of Lixisenatide and Insulin Glargine, Versus Insulin Glargine in Type 2
Diabetes Inadequately Controlled on Metformin Monotherapy: The LixiLan Proof-of-Concept
Randomized Trial. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(9):1579-1586.
236. Blonde L, Anderson JE, Chava P, Dendy JA. Rationale for a titratable fixed-ratio co-formulation
of a basal insulin analog and a glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist in patients with type 2
diabetes. Curr Med Res Opin. 2019;35(5):793-804.
237. Blonde L, Rosenstock J, Del Prato S, et al. Switching to iGlarLixi Versus Continuing Daily
or Weekly GLP-1 RA in Type 2 Diabetes Inadequately Controlled by GLP-1 RA and Oral
Antihyperglycemic Therapy: The LixiLan-G Randomized Clinical Trial. Diabetes Care.
2019;42(11):2108-2116.
238. Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Diaz R, et al. Lixisenatide in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Acute
Coronary Syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015;373(23):2247-2257.
239. Umpierrez G, Tofe Povedano S, Perez Manghi F, Shurzinske L, Pechtner V. Efficacy and safety of
dulaglutide monotherapy versus metformin in type 2 diabetes in a randomized controlled trial
(AWARD-3). Diabetes Care. 2014;37(8):2168-2176.
240. Nauck M, Weinstock RS, Umpierrez GE, Guerci B, Skrivanek Z, Milicevic Z. Efficacy and safety of
dulaglutide versus sitagliptin after 52 weeks in type 2 diabetes in a randomized controlled trial
(AWARD-5). Diabetes Care. 2014;37(8):2149-2158.
241. Weinstock RS, Guerci B, Umpierrez G, Nauck MA, Skrivanek Z, Milicevic Z. Safety and efficacy
of once-weekly dulaglutide versus sitagliptin after 2 years in metformin-treated patients
with type 2 diabetes (AWARD-5): a randomized, phase III study. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2015;17(9):849-858.
242. Dungan KM, Weitgasser R, Perez Manghi F, et al. A 24-week study to evaluate the efficacy
and safety of once-weekly dulaglutide added on to glimepiride in type 2 diabetes (AWARD-8).
Diabetes Obes Metab. 2016;18(5):475-482.
243. Ludvik B, Frias JP, Tinahones FJ, et al. Dulaglutide as add-on therapy to SGL T2 inhibitors in
patients with inadequately controlled type 2 diabetes (AWARD-10): a 24-week, randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2018;6(5):370-381.
244. Dungan KM, Povedano ST, Forst T, et al. Once-weekly dulaglutide versus once-daily liraglutide
in metformin-treated patients with type 2 diabetes (AWARD-6): a randomised, open-label,
phase 3, non-inferiority trial. Lancet. 2014;384(9951):1349-1357.
245. Wysham C, Blevins T, Arakaki R, et al. Efficacy and safety of dulaglutide added onto
pioglitazone and metformin versus exenatide in type 2 diabetes in a randomized controlled
trial (AWARD-1). Diabetes Care. 2014;37(8):2159-2167.
246. Pozzilli P, Norwood P, Jodar E, et al. Placebo-controlled, randomized trial of the addition of onceweekly glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist dulaglutide to titrated daily insulin glargine in
patients with type 2 diabetes (AWARD-9). Diabetes Obes Metab. 2017;19(7):1024-1031.
247. Blonde L, Jendle J, Gross J, et al. Once-weekly dulaglutide versus bedtime insulin glargine,
both in combination with prandial insulin lispro, in patients with type 2 diabetes (AWARD-4): a
randomised, open-label, phase 3, non-inferiority study. Lancet. 2015;385(9982):2057-2066.
248. Gerstein HC, Colhoun HM, Dagenais GR, et al. Dulaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes
in type 2 diabetes (REWIND): a double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet.
2019;394(10193):121-130.
249. Andreadis P, Karagiannis T, Malandris K, et al. Semaglutide for type 2 diabetes mellitus: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism. 2018;20(9):2255-2263.
REFERENCES
250. Sorli C, Harashima SI, Tsoukas GM, et al. Efficacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide
monotherapy versus placebo in patients with type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 1): a double-blind,
randomised, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multinational, multicentre phase 3a trial.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(4):251-260.
251. Ahren B, Masmiquel L, Kumar H, et al. Efficacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide versus
once-daily sitagliptin as an add-on to metformin, thiazolidinediones, or both, in patients with
type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 2): a 56-week, double-blind, phase 3a, randomised trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(5):341-354.
252. Lingvay I, Catarig AM, Frias JP, et al. Efficacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide versus
daily canagliflozin as add-on to metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN
8): a double-blind, phase 3b, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2019;7(11):834-844.
253. Zinman B, Bhosekar V, Busch R, et al. Semaglutide once weekly as add-on to SGL T-2 inhibitor
therapy in type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 9): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2019;7(5):356-367.
254. Ahmann AJ, Capehorn M, Charpentier G, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Once-Weekly Semaglutide
Versus Exenatide ER in Subjects With Type 2 Diabetes (SUSTAIN 3): A 56-Week, Open-Label,
Randomized Clinical Trial. Diabetes Care. 2018;41(2):258-266.
255. Pratley RE, Aroda VR, Lingvay I, et al. Semaglutide versus dulaglutide once weekly in patients
with type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 7): a randomised, open-label, phase 3b trial. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2018;6(4):275-286.
256. Capehorn MS, Catarig AM, Furberg JK, et al. Efficacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide
1.0mg vs once-daily liraglutide 1.2mg as add-on to 1-3 oral antidiabetic drugs in subjects with
type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 10). Diabetes Metab. 2019:101117.
257. Aroda VR, Bain SC, Cariou B, et al. Efficacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide versus
once-daily insulin glargine as add-on to metformin (with or without sulfonylureas) in insulinnaive patients with type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 4): a randomised, open-label, parallel-group,
multicentre, multinational, phase 3a trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(5):355-366.
258. Rodbard HW, Lingvay I, Reed J, et al. Semaglutide Added to Basal Insulin in Type 2 Diabetes
(SUSTAIN 5): A Randomized, Controlled Trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018;103(6):2291-2301.
259. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al. Semaglutide and Cardiovascular Outcomes in Patients with
Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(19):1834-1844.
260. Vilsboll T, Bain SC, Leiter LA, et al. Semaglutide, reduction in glycated haemoglobin and the risk
of diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2018;20(4):889-897.
261. Romera I, Cebrián-Cuenca A, Álvarez-Guisasola F, Gomez-Peralta F, Reviriego J. A Review of
Practical Issues on the Use of Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists for the Management of
Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Therapy. 2019;10(1):5-19.
262. Alves C, Batel-Marques F, Macedo AF. A meta-analysis of serious adverse events reported
with exenatide and liraglutide: acute pancreatitis and cancer. Diabetes Res Clin Pract.
2012;98(2):271-284.
263. Phung OJ, Sobieraj DM, Engel SS, Rajpathak SN. Early combination therapy for the treatment
of type 2 diabetes mellitus: systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2014;16(5):410-417.
264. Inzucchi SE, Bergenstal RM, Buse JB, et al. Management of Hyperglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes,
2015: A Patient-Centered Approach: Update to a Position Statement of the American
Diabetes Association and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2015;38(1):140-149.
265. Rodbard HW, Blonde L, Braithwaite SS, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists
medical guidelines for clinical practice for the management of diabetes mellitus. Endocr Pract.
2007;13 Suppl 1:1-68.
266. Marso SP, McGuire DK, Zinman B, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Degludec versus Glargine in Type 2
Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2017;377(8):723-732.
267. Yki-Jarvinen H, Dressler A, Ziemen M. Less nocturnal hypoglycemia and better post-dinner
glucose control with bedtime insulin glargine compared with bedtime NPH insulin during
insulin combination therapy in type 2 diabetes. HOE 901/3002 Study Group. Diabetes Care.
2000;23(8):1130-1136.
REFERENCES
268. Yki-Jarvinen H, Kauppila M, Kujansuu E, et al. Comparison of insulin regimens in patients with
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 1992;327(20):1426-1433.
269. Yki-Järvinen H, Ryysy L, Nikkilä K, Tulokas T, Vanamo R, Heikkilä M. Comparison of Bedtime
Insulin Regimens in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Randomized, Controlled Trial.
Annals of Internal Medicine. 1999;130(5):389-396.
270. Zinman B, Philis-Tsimikas A, Cariou B, et al. Insulin degludec versus insulin glargine in insulinnaive patients with type 2 diabetes: a 1-year, randomized, treat-to-target trial (BEGIN Once
Long). Diabetes Care. 2012;35(12):2464-2471.
271. Kilo C, Mezitis N, Jain R, Mersey J, McGill J, Raskin P. Starting patients with type 2 diabetes
on insulin therapy using once-daily injections of biphasic insulin aspart 70/30, biphasic human
insulin 70/30, or NPH insulin in combination with metformin. J Diabetes Complications.
2003;17(6):307-313.
272. Strojek K, Bebakar WMW, Khutsoane DT, et al. Once-daily initiation with biphasic insulin
aspart 30 versus insulin glargine in patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled
with oral drugs: an open-label, multinational RCT. Current Medical Research and Opinion.
2009;25(12):2887-2894.
273. Aviles-Santa L, Sinding J, Raskin P. Effects of metformin in patients with poorly controlled,
insulin-treated type 2 diabetes mellitus. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Ann Intern Med. 1999;131(3):182-188.
274. Ponssen HH, Elte JW, Lehert P, Schouten JP, Bets D. Combined metformin and insulin therapy
for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin Ther. 2000;22(6):709-718.
275. Wright A, Burden AC, Paisey RB, Cull CA, Holman RR. Sulfonylurea inadequacy: efficacy
of addition of insulin over 6 years in patients with type 2 diabetes in the U.K. Prospective
Diabetes Study (UKPDS 57). Diabetes Care. 2002;25(2):330-336.
276. Coniff RF, Shapiro JA, Seaton TB, Hoogwerf BJ, Hunt JA. A double-blind placebo-controlled
trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of acarbose for the treatment of patients with insulinrequiring type II diabetes. Diabetes Care. 1995;18(7):928-932.
277. Marino AB, Cole SW. Alogliptin: safety, efficacy, and clinical implications. J Pharm Pract.
2015;28(1):99-106.
278. Richter B, Bandeira-Echtler E, Bergerhoff K, Lerch CL. Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors
for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008(2):Cd006739.
279. White WB, Cannon CP, Heller SR, et al. Alogliptin after acute coronary syndrome in patients
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(14):1327-1335.
280. Raskin P, Rendell M, Riddle MC, Dole JF, Freed MI, Rosenstock J. A randomized trial of
rosiglitazone therapy in patients with inadequately controlled insulin-treated type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2001;24(7):1226-1232.
281. Russell-Jones D, Khan R. Insulin-associated weight gain in diabetes--causes, effects and coping
strategies. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2007;9(6):799-812.
282. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Practical Guide to Insulin Therapy in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. 2010.
283. Poitout V, Robertson RP. Glucolipotoxicity: fuel excess and beta-cell dysfunction. Endocr Rev.
2008;29(3):351-366.
284. Holman RR, Thorne KI, Farmer AJ, et al. Addition of Biphasic, Prandial, or Basal Insulin to Oral
Therapy in Type 2 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2007;357(17):1716-1730.
285. Weng J, Li Y, Xu W, et al. Effect of intensive insulin therapy on beta-cell function and glycaemic
control in patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes: a multicentre randomised parallelgroup trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9626):1753-1760.
286. Li Y, Xu W, Liao Z, et al. Induction of long-term glycemic control in newly diagnosed type
2 diabetic patients is associated with improvement of beta-cell function. Diabetes Care.
2004;27(11):2597-2602.
287. Bolli GB, Riddle MC, Bergenstal RM, et al. New insulin glargine 300 U/ml compared with
glargine 100 U/ml in insulin-naive people with type 2 diabetes on oral glucose-lowering drugs:
a randomized controlled trial (EDITION 3). Diabetes Obes Metab. 2015;17(4):386-394.
288. Riddle MC, Bolli GB, Ziemen M, Muehlen-Bartmer I, Bizet F, Home PD. New Insulin Glargine 300
Units/mL Versus Glargine 100 Units/mL in People With Type 2 Diabetes Using Basal and Mealtime
Insulin: Glucose Control and Hypoglycemia in a 6-Month Randomized Controlled Trial (EDITION
1). Diabetes Care. 2014;37(10):2755-2762.
REFERENCES
289. Terauchi Y, Koyama M, Cheng X, et al. New insulin glargine 300 U/ml versus glargine 100 U/ml
in Japanese people with type 2 diabetes using basal insulin and oral antihyperglycaemic drugs:
glucose control and hypoglycaemia in a randomized controlled trial (EDITION JP 2). Diabetes
Obes Metab. 2016;18(4):366-374.
290. Yki-Jarvinen H, Bergenstal R, Ziemen M, et al. New insulin glargine 300 units/mL versus
glargine 100 units/mL in people with type 2 diabetes using oral agents and basal insulin:
glucose control and hypoglycemia in a 6-month randomized controlled trial (EDITION 2).
Diabetes Care. 2014;37(12):3235-3243.
291. Zhou FL, Nicholls C, Xie L, Wang Y, Vaidya N, Meneghini LF. Hypoglycaemia and treatment
patterns among insulin-treated patients with type 2 diabetes who switched to insulin glargine
300 units/mL versus other basal insulin in a real-world setting. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab.
2019;2(3):e00073.
292. Franek E, Haluzik M, Canecki Varzic S, et al. Twice-daily insulin degludec/insulin aspart provides
superior fasting plasma glucose control and a reduced rate of hypoglycaemia compared
with biphasic insulin aspart 30 in insulin-naive adults with Type 2 diabetes. Diabet Med.
2016;33(4):497-505.
293. Fulcher GR, Christiansen JS, Bantwal G, et al. Comparison of insulin degludec/insulin aspart
and biphasic insulin aspart 30 in uncontrolled, insulin-treated type 2 diabetes: a phase 3a,
randomized, treat-to-target trial. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(8):2084-2090.
294. Kaneko S, Chow F, Choi DS, et al. Insulin degludec/insulin aspart versus biphasic insulin aspart 30
in Asian patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled on basal or pre-/self-mixed insulin:
a 26-week, randomised, treat-to-target trial. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015;107(1):139-147.
295. Davies M, Storms F, Shutler S, Bianchi-Biscay M, Gomis R. Improvement of glycemic control in
subjects with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes: comparison of two treatment algorithms using
insulin glargine. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(6):1282-1288.
296. Heller S, Bode B, Kozlovski P, Svendsen AL. Meta-analysis of insulin aspart versus regular
human insulin used in a basal-bolus regimen for the treatment of diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes.
2013;5(4):482-491.
297. Mannucci E, Monami M, Marchionni N. Short-acting insulin analogues vs. regular human insulin
in type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2009;11(1):53-59.
298. Reznik Y, Cohen O, Aronson R, et al. Insulin pump treatment compared with multiple daily
injections for treatment of type 2 diabetes (OpT2mise): a randomised open-label controlled
trial. Lancet. 2014;384(9950):1265-1272.
299. Peyrot M, Barnett AH, Meneghini LF, Schumm-Draeger PM. Insulin adherence behaviours and
barriers in the multinational Global Attitudes of Patients and Physicians in Insulin Therapy
study. Diabet Med. 2012;29(5):682-689.
300. Heinemann L, Hompesch M. Biosimilar Insulins: Basic Considerations. J Diabetes Sci Technol.
2014;8(1):6-13.
301. Khoo YSK, Tang TY, Goh PS, Halimi HM, Ab Ghani A. An Update on the Registration of
Biosimilars in Malaysia. Ther Innov Regul Sci. 2017;51(1):55-59.
302. Liu J, Wang LN. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists for preventing
recurrent stroke and other vascular events in patients with stroke or transient ischaemic
attack. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014(1):Cd010693.
303. Singh S, Loke YK, Furberg CD. Thiazolidinediones and heart failure: a teleo-analysis. Diabetes
Care. 2007;30(8):2148-2153.
304. Erpeldinger S, Rehman MB, Berkhout C, et al. Efficacy and safety of insulin in type 2 diabetes:
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMC Endocrine Disorders. 2016;16(1):39.
305. Nathan DM. The diabetes control and complications trial/epidemiology of diabetes
interventions and complications study at 30 years: overview. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(1):9-16.
306. King P, Peacock I, Donnelly R. The UK prospective diabetes study (UKPDS): clinical and
therapeutic implications for type 2 diabetes. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1999;48(5):643-648.
307. National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP). Harmaonizing Haemoglobin A1c
Testing. Available at http://www.ngsp.org/. Accessed March 2020.
308. Nathan DM, Kuenen J, Borg R, Zheng H, Schoenfeld D, Heine RJ. Translating the A1C assay into
estimated average glucose values. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(8):1473-1478.
REFERENCES
309. Nathan DM, Cleary PA, Backlund JY, et al. Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular
disease in patients with type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(25):2643-2653.
310. Ray KK, Seshasai SR, Wijesuriya S, et al. Effect of intensive control of glucose on cardiovascular
outcomes and death in patients with diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials. Lancet. 2009;373(9677):1765-1772.
311. Venkataraman K, Kao SL, Thai AC, et al. Ethnicity modifies the relation between fasting plasma
glucose and HbA1c in Indians, Malays and Chinese. Diabet Med. 2012;29(7):911-917.
312. Parrinello CM, Selvin E. Beyond HbA1c and glucose: the role of nontraditional glycemic markers
in diabetes diagnosis, prognosis, and management. Curr Diab Rep. 2014;14(11):548.
313. Hirst JA, McLellan JH, Price CP, et al. Performance of point-of-care HbA1c test devices:
implications for use in clinical practice – a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Chem Lab
Med. 2017;55(2):167-180.
314. Farmer A, Wade A, Goyder E, et al. Impact of self monitoring of blood glucose in the
management of patients with non-insulin treated diabetes: open parallel group randomised
trial. BMJ. 2007;335(7611):132.
315. Faas A, Schellevis FG, Van Eijk JT. The efficacy of self-monitoring of blood glucose in NIDDM
subjects. A criteria-based literature review. Diabetes care. 1997;20(9):1482-1486.
316. Mannucci E, Antenore A, Giorgino F, Scavini M. Effects of Structured Versus Unstructured
Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose on Glucose Control in Patients With Non-insulin-treated
Type 2 Diabetes: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. J Diabetes Sci Technol.
2018;12(1):183-189.
317. Zhu H, Zhu Y, Leung SW. Is self-monitoring of blood glucose effective in improving glycaemic
control in type 2 diabetes without insulin treatment: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled
trials. BMJ Open. 2016;6(9):e010524.
318. Bosi E, Scavini M, Ceriello A, et al. Intensive structured self-monitoring of blood glucose and
glycemic control in noninsulin-treated type 2 diabetes: the PRISMA randomized trial. Diabetes
Care. 2013;36(10):2887-2894.
319. Farmer AJ, Perera R, Ward A, et al. Meta-analysis of individual patient data in randomised trials
of self monitoring of blood glucose in people with non-insulin treated type 2 diabetes. BMJ.
2012;344:e486.
320. Franciosi M, Lucisano G, Pellegrini F, et al. ROSES: role of self-monitoring of blood glucose and
intensive education in patients with Type 2 diabetes not receiving insulin. A pilot randomized
clinical trial. Diabet Med. 2011;28(7):789-796.
321. Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Schikman CH, et al. Structured self-monitoring of blood glucose
significantly reduces A1C levels in poorly controlled, noninsulin-treated type 2 diabetes: results
from the Structured Testing Program study. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(2):262-267.
322. Clar C, Barnard K, Cummins E, Royle P, Waugh N. Self-monitoring of blood glucose in type 2
diabetes: systematic review. Health Technol Assess. 2010;14(12):1-140.
323. Lim LL, Lau ESH, Kong APS, et al. Aspects of Multicomponent Integrated Care Promote
Sustained Improvement in Surrogate Clinical Outcomes: A Systematic Review and Metaanalysis. Diabetes Care. 2018;41(6):1312-1320.
324. Shan R, Sarkar S, Martin SS. Digital health technology and mobile devices for the management
of diabetes mellitus: state of the art. Diabetologia. 2019;62(6):877-887.
325. Fleming GA, Petrie JR, Bergenstal RM, Holl RW, Peters AL, Heinemann L. Diabetes Digital
App Technology: Benefits, Challenges, and Recommendations. A Consensus Report by the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD) and the American Diabetes Association
(ADA) Diabetes Technology Working Group. Diabetes Care. 2020;43(1):250-260.
326. Bonoto BC, de Araujo VE, Godoi IP, et al. Efficacy of Mobile Apps to Support the Care of
Patients With Diabetes Mellitus: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized
Controlled Trials. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2017;5(3):e4.
327. Hou C, Carter B, Hewitt J, Francisa T, Mayor S. Do Mobile Phone Applications Improve Glycemic
Control (HbA1c) in the Self-management of Diabetes? A Systematic Review, Meta-analysis, and
GRADE of 14 Randomized Trials. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(11):2089-2095.
328. Lee PA, Greenfield G, Pappas Y. The impact of telehealth remote patient monitoring on
glycemic control in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of systematic
reviews of randomised controlled trials. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018;18(1):495.
REFERENCES
329. Piette JD, Aikens JE, Rosland AM, Sussman JB. Rethinking the Frequency of Between-Visit
Monitoring for Patients With Diabetes. Medical Care. 2014;52(6):511-518.
330. Maahs DM, DeSalvo D, Pyle L, et al. Effect of acetaminophen on CGM glucose in an outpatient
setting. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(10):e158-159.
331. Zick R, Petersen B, Richter M, Haug C. Comparison of continuous blood glucose measurement
with conventional documentation of hypoglycemia in patients with Type 2 diabetes on multiple
daily insulin injection therapy. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2007;9(6):483-492.
332. Pazos-Couselo M, Garcia-Lopez JM, Gonzalez-Rodriguez M, et al. High incidence of
hypoglycemia in stable insulin-treated type 2 diabetes mellitus: continuous glucose
monitoring vs. self-monitored blood glucose. Observational prospective study. Can J Diabetes.
2015;39(5):428-433.
333. Hay LC, Wilmshurst EG, Fulcher G. Unrecognized hypo- and hyperglycemia in well-controlled
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: the results of continuous glucose monitoring. Diabetes
Technol Ther. 2003;5(1):19-26.
334. Munshi MN, Segal AR, Suhl E, et al. Frequent hypoglycemia among elderly patients with poor
glycemic control. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171(4):362-364.
335. Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM, et al. Clinical Targets for Continuous Glucose Monitoring
Data Interpretation: Recommendations From the International Consensus on Time in Range.
Diabetes Care. 2019;42(8):1593-1603.
336. Gandhi GY, Kovalaske M, Kudva Y, et al. Efficacy of continuous glucose monitoring in improving
glycemic control and reducing hypoglycemia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2011;5(4):952-965.
337. Poolsup N, Suksomboon N, Kyaw AM. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the effectiveness
of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) on glucose control in diabetes. Diabetol Metab Syndr.
2013;5:39.
338. Ehrhardt NM, Chellappa M, Walker MS, Fonda SJ, Vigersky RA. The effect of real-time
continuous glucose monitoring on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J
Diabetes Sci Technol. 2011;5(3):668-675.
339. Beck RW, Riddlesworth TD, Ruedy K, et al. Continuous Glucose Monitoring Versus Usual Care in
Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Receiving Multiple Daily Insulin Injections: A Randomized Trial.
Ann Intern Med. 2017;167(6):365-374.
340. Yaron M, Roitman E, Aharon-Hananel G, et al. Effect of Flash Glucose Monitoring Technology
on Glycemic Control and Treatment Satisfaction in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes
Care. 2019;42(7):1178-1184.
341. Ajjan RA, Jackson N, Thomson SA. Reduction in HbA1c using professional flash glucose
monitoring in insulin-treated type 2 diabetes patients managed in primary and secondary care
settings: A pilot, multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Diab Vasc Dis Res. 2019;16(4):385-395.
342. Yoo HJ, An HG, Park SY, et al. Use of a real time continuous glucose monitoring system
as a motivational device for poorly controlled type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract.
2008;82(1):73-79.
343. Haak T, Hanaire H, Ajjan R, Hermanns N, Riveline JP, Rayman G. Flash Glucose-Sensing
Technology as a Replacement for Blood Glucose Monitoring for the Management of InsulinTreated Type 2 Diabetes: a Multicenter, Open-Label Randomized Controlled Trial. Diabetes
Ther. 2017;8(1):55-73.
344. Allen NA, Fain JA, Braun B, Chipkin SR. Continuous glucose monitoring counseling improves
physical activity behaviors of individuals with type 2 diabetes: A randomized clinical trial.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2008;80(3):371-379.
345. Vigersky RA, Fonda SJ, Chellappa M, Walker MS, Ehrhardt NM. Short- and long-term effects
of real-time continuous glucose monitoring in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2012;35(1):32-38.
346. Fokkert MJ, van Dijk PR, Edens MA, et al. Performance of the FreeStyle Libre Flash glucose
monitoring system in patients with type 1 and 2 diabetes mellitus. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care.
2017;5(1):e000320.
347. Boscari F, Galasso S, Acciaroli G, et al. Head-to-head comparison of the accuracy of Abbott
FreeStyle Libre and Dexcom G5 mobile. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2018;28(4):425-427.
REFERENCES
348. Bailey T, Bode BW, Christiansen MP, Klaff LJ, Alva S. The Performance and Usability of a FactoryCalibrated Flash Glucose Monitoring System. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2015;17(11):787-794.
349. Fonseca VA, Grunberger G, Anhalt H, et al. CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORING:
A CONSENSUS CONFERENCE OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF CLINICAL
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS AND AMERICAN COLLEGE OF ENDOCRINOLOGY. Endocr Pract.
2016;22(8):1008-1021.
350. Danne T, Nimri R, Battelino T, et al. International Consensus on Use of Continuous Glucose
Monitoring. Diabetes Care. 2017;40(12):1631-1640.
351. Petrie JR, Peters AL, Bergenstal RM, Holl RW, Fleming GA, Heinemann L. Improving the clinical
value and utility of CGM systems: issues and recommendations : A joint statement of the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes and the American Diabetes Association Diabetes
Technology Working Group. Diabetologia. 2017;60(12):2319-2328.
352. Asian-Pacific Type 2 Diabetes Policy Group and International Diabetes Federation (IDF)
Western Pacific Region. Type 2 Diabetes Practical Targets and Treatments. 4 ed. Melbourne,
Australia: International Diabetes Institute (IDI); 2005.
353. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, et al. Blood pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular
disease and death: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016;387(10022):957-967.
354. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of blood pressure lowering on outcome
incidence in hypertension. 1. Overview, meta-analyses, and meta-regression analyses of
randomized trials. J Hypertens. 2014;32(12):2285-2295.
355. Emdin CA, Rahimi K, Neal B, Callender T, Perkovic V, Patel A. Blood pressure lowering in type 2
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2015;313(6):603-615.
356. Brunstrom M, Carlberg B. Association of Blood Pressure Lowering With Mortality and
Cardiovascular Disease Across Blood Pressure Levels: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
JAMA Intern Med. 2018;178(1):28-36.
357. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of blood pressure lowering treatment in
hypertension: 8. Outcome reductions vs. discontinuations because of adverse drug events - metaanalyses of randomized trials. J Hypertens. 2016;34(8):1451-1463.
358. The ACCORD Study Group. Effects of Intensive Blood-Pressure Control in Type 2 Diabetes
Mellitus. New England Journal of Medicine. 2010;362(17):1575-1585.
359. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of blood-pressure-lowering treatment on outcome
incidence in hypertension: 10 - Should blood pressure management differ in hypertensive
patients with and without diabetes mellitus? Overview and meta-analyses of randomized trials. J
Hypertens. 2017;35(5):922-944.
360. The SPRINT research group. A Randomized Trial of Intensive versus Standard Blood-Pressure
Control. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015;373(22):2103-2116.
361. Cooper-DeHoff RM, Gong Y, Handberg EM, et al. Tight blood pressure control and
cardiovascular outcomes among hypertensive patients with diabetes and coronary artery
disease. JAMA. 2010;304(1):61-68.
362. Vidal-Petiot E, Ford I, Greenlaw N, et al. Cardiovascular event rates and mortality according to
achieved systolic and diastolic blood pressure in patients with stable coronary artery disease:
an international cohort study. Lancet. 2016;388(10056):2142-2152.
363. Bohm M, Schumacher H, Teo KK, et al. Achieved blood pressure and cardiovascular
outcomes in high-risk patients: results from ONTARGET and TRANSCEND trials. Lancet.
2017;389(10085):2226-2237.
364. Mancia G, Kjeldsen SE, Zappe DH, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes at different on-treatment blood
pressures in the hypertensive patients of the VALUE trial. Eur Heart J. 2016;37(12):955-964.
365. White WB, Jalil F, Cushman WC, et al. Average Clinician-Measured Blood Pressures and
Cardiovascular Outcomes in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Ischemic Heart Disease
in the EXAMINE Trial. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7(20):e009114.
366. Bergmark BA, Scirica BM, Steg PG, et al. Blood pressure and cardiovascular outcomes in
patients with diabetes and high cardiovascular risk. Eur Heart J. 2018;39(24):2255-2262.
367. Brunstrom M, Carlberg B. Standardization according to blood pressure lowering in metaanalyses of antihypertensive trials: comparison of three methodological approaches. J
Hypertens. 2018;36(1):4-15.
REFERENCES
368. Ruggenenti P, Fassi A, Ilieva AP, et al. Preventing microalbuminuria in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J
Med. 2004;351(19):1941-1951.
369. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on
cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of
the HOPE study and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study
Investigators. Lancet. 2000;355(9200):253-259.
370. Barnett AH, Bain SC, Bouter P, et al. Angiotensin-receptor blockade versus converting-enzyme
inhibition in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(19):1952-1961.
371. Gaede P, Tarnow L, Vedel P, Parving HH, Pedersen O. Remission to normoalbuminuria during
multifactorial treatment preserves kidney function in patients with type 2 diabetes and
microalbuminuria. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004;19(11):2784-2788.
372. Brenner BM, Cooper ME, de Zeeuw D, et al. Effects of losartan on renal and cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(12):861-869.
373. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Clarke WR, et al. Renoprotective effect of the angiotensin-receptor
antagonist irbesartan in patients with nephropathy due to type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2001;345(12):851-860.
374. Makani H, Bangalore S, Desouza KA, Shah A, Messerli FH. Efficacy and safety of dual blockade
of the renin-angiotensin system: meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ. 2013;346:f360.
375. Malaysian Ministry of Health. Management of Hypertension (5th edition). 2018.
376. Turnbull FM, Abraira C, Anderson RJ, et al. Intensive glucose control and macrovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia. 2009;52(11):2288-2298.
377. Laiteerapong N, Ham SA, Gao Y, et al. The Legacy Effect in Type 2 Diabetes: Impact of Early
Glycemic Control on Future Complications (The Diabetes & Aging Study). Diabetes Care.
2019;42(3):416-426.
378. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for
Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents. 2012: NIH Publication
No. 12-7486A.
379. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and
Adolescents: Summary Report. Paediatrics 2011;128(Suppl 5):S213-S256.
380. Bays HE, Jones PH, Orringer CE, Brown WV, Jacobson TA. National Lipid Association Annual
Summary of Clinical Lipidology 2016. Journal of Clinical Lipidology. 2016;10(1):S1-S43.
381. Collins R, Armitage J, Parish S, Sleigh P, Peto R. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of
cholesterol-lowering with simvastatin in 5963 people with diabetes: a randomised placebocontrolled trial. Lancet. 2003;361(9374):2005-2016.
382. Colhoun HM, Betteridge DJ, Durrington PN, et al. Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease
with atorvastatin in type 2 diabetes in the Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study (CARDS):
multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364(9435):685-696.
383. Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, et al. Efficacy and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL
cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from 170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet.
2010;376(9753):1670-1681.
384. Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, et al. Ezetimibe Added to Statin Therapy after Acute
Coronary Syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(25):2387-2397.
385. Giugliano RP, Cannon CP, Blazing MA, et al. Benefit of Adding Ezetimibe to Statin Therapy
on Cardiovascular Outcomes and Safety in Patients With Versus Without Diabetes Mellitus:
Results From IMPROVE-IT (Improved Reduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International
Trial). Circulation. 2018;137(15):1571-1582.
386. Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Collins R, et al. Efficacy of cholesterol-lowering therapy in
18,686 people with diabetes in 14 randomised trials of statins: a meta-analysis. Lancet.
2008;371(9607):117-125.
387. Ray KK, Colhoun HM, Szarek M, et al. Effects of alirocumab on cardiovascular and metabolic
outcomes after acute coronary syndrome in patients with or without diabetes: a prespecified
analysis of the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2019;7(8):618-628.
388. Sabatine MS, Giugliano RP, Keech AC, et al. Evolocumab and Clinical Outcomes in Patients with
Cardiovascular Disease. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(18):1713-1722.
REFERENCES
389. Sabatine MS, Leiter LA, Wiviott SD, et al. Cardiovascular safety and efficacy of the PCSK9
inhibitor evolocumab in patients with and without diabetes and the effect of evolocumab on
glycaemia and risk of new-onset diabetes: a prespecified analysis of the FOURIER randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(12):941-950.
390. Schwartz GG, Steg PG, Szarek M, et al. Alirocumab and Cardiovascular Outcomes after Acute
Coronary Syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2018;379(22):2097-2107.
391. Mach F, Baigent C, Catapano AL, et al. 2019 ESC/EAS Guidelines for the management of
dyslipidaemias: lipid modification to reduce cardiovascular risk. Eur Heart J. 2020;41(1):111-188.
392. Elam MB, Hunninghake DB, Davis KB, et al. Effect of niacin on lipid and lipoprotein levels and
glycemic control in patients with diabetes and peripheral arterial disease: the ADMIT study: A
randomized trial. Arterial Disease Multiple Intervention Trial. JAMA. 2000;284(10):1263-1270.
393. Grundy SM, Vega GL, McGovern ME, et al. Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of once-daily
niacin for the treatment of dyslipidemia associated with type 2 diabetes: results of the
assessment of diabetes control and evaluation of the efficacy of niaspan trial. Arch Intern Med.
2002;162(14):1568-1576.
394. Boden WE, Probstfield JL, Anderson T, et al. Niacin in patients with low HDL cholesterol levels
receiving intensive statin therapy. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(24):2255-2267.
395. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Miller M, et al. Cardiovascular Risk Reduction with Icosapent Ethyl for
Hypertriglyceridemia. N Engl J Med. 2019;380(1):11-22.
396. Ginsberg HN, Elam MB, Lovato LC, et al. Effects of combination lipid therapy in type 2 diabetes
mellitus. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(17):1563-1574.
397. Elam MB, Ginsberg HN, Lovato LC, et al. Association of Fenofibrate Therapy With Longterm Cardiovascular Risk in Statin-Treated Patients With Type 2 Diabetes. JAMA Cardiol.
2017;2(4):370-380.
398. Scott R, O’Brien R, Fulcher G, et al. Effects of fenofibrate treatment on cardiovascular disease
risk in 9,795 individuals with type 2 diabetes and various components of the metabolic
syndrome: the Fenofibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) study.
Diabetes Care. 2009;32(3):493-498.
399. Saha SA, Arora RR. Fibrates in the prevention of cardiovascular disease in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus--a pooled meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials. Int J
Cardiol. 2010;141(2):157-166.
400. Keech AC, Mitchell P, Summanen PA, et al. Effect of fenofibrate on the need for laser
treatment for diabetic retinopathy (FIELD study): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2007;370(9600):1687-1697.
401. Chew EY, Ambrosius WT, Davis MD, et al. Effects of medical therapies on retinopathy
progression in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(3):233-244.
402. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment
of blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Circulation. 2014;129(25 Suppl 2):S1-45.
403. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Obesity. 2004.
404. World Health Organization (WHO). Appropriate body-mass index for Asian populations and its
implications for policy and intervention strategies. Lancet. 2004;363(9403):157-163.
405. Ministry of Health, Malaysia. National Diabetes Registry Report. 2019. Available at: http://ndr.
moh.gov.my/report/clinical_audit/crn1.
406. Franz MJ, Boucher JL, Rutten-Ramos S, VanWormer JJ. Lifestyle weight-loss intervention
outcomes in overweight and obese adults with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized clinical trials. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2015;115(9):1447-1463.
407. Lau DC, Teoh H. Impact of Current and Emerging Glucose-Lowering Drugs on Body Weight in
Type 2 Diabetes. Can J Diabetes. 2015;39 Suppl 5:S148-154.
408. Davies MJ, Bergenstal R, Bode B, et al. Efficacy of Liraglutide for Weight Loss Among Patients
With Type 2 Diabetes: The SCALE Diabetes Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2015;314(7):687-699.
409. Jebb SA, Astbury NM, Tearne S, Nickless A, Aveyard P. Doctor Referral of Overweight People to
a Low-Energy Treatment (DROPLET) in primary care using total diet replacement products: a
protocol for a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2017;7(8):e016709.
REFERENCES
410. Donnelly JE, Blair SN, Jakicic JM, Manore MM, Rankin JW, Smith BK. American College of Sports
Medicine Position Stand. Appropriate physical activity intervention strategies for weight loss
and prevention of weight regain for adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41(2):459-471.
411. Weintraub M, Sundaresan PR, Schuster B, et al. Long-term weight control study. II (weeks 34
to 104). An open-label study of continuous fenfluramine plus phentermine versus targeted
intermittent medication as adjuncts to behavior modification, caloric restriction, and exercise. Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 1992;51(5):595-601.
412. Kim KK, Cho HJ, Kang HC, Youn BB, Lee KR. Effects on weight reduction and safety of shortterm phentermine administration in Korean obese people. Yonsei Med J. 2006;47(5):614-625.
413. Munro JF, MacCuish AC, Wilson EM, Duncan LJ. Comparison of continuous and intermittent
anorectic therapy in obesity. Br Med J. 1968;1(5588):352-354.
414. Hollander PA, Elbein SC, Hirsch IB, et al. Role of orlistat in the treatment of obese patients with
type 2 diabetes. A 1-year randomized double-blind study. Diabetes Care. 1998;21(8):1288-1294.
415. Lindgarde F. The effect of orlistat on body weight and coronary heart disease risk profile in
obese patients: the Swedish Multimorbidity Study. J Intern Med. 2000;248(3):245-254.
416. Jacob S, Rabbia M, Meier MK, Hauptman J. Orlistat 120 mg improves glycaemic control
in type 2 diabetic patients with or without concurrent weight loss. Diabetes Obes Metab.
2009;11(4):361-371.
417. Rowe R, Cowx M, Poole C, McEwan P, Morgan C, Walker M. The effects of orlistat in patients
with diabetes: improvement in glycaemic control and weight loss. Curr Med Res Opin.
2005;21(11):1885-1890.
418. Blackman A, Foster GD, Zammit G, et al. Effect of liraglutide 3.0 mg in individuals with obesity
and moderate or severe obstructive sleep apnea: the SCALE Sleep Apnea randomized clinical
trial. Int J Obes (Lond). 2016;40(8):1310-1319.
419. Burcelin R, Gourdy P. Harnessing glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists for the
pharmacological treatment of overweight and obesity. Obes Rev. 2017;18(1):86-98.
420. le Roux C, Aroda V, Hemmingsson J, Cancino AP, Christensen R, Pi-Sunyer X. Comparison of
Efficacy and Safety of Liraglutide 3.0 mg in Individuals with BMI above and below 35 kg/m2: A
Post-hoc Analysis. Obes Facts. 2017;10(6):531-544.
421. Pi-Sunyer X, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al. A Randomized, Controlled Trial of 3.0 mg of Liraglutide
in Weight Management. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015;373(1):11-22.
422. Wadden TA, Hollander P, Klein S, et al. Weight maintenance and additional weight loss with
liraglutide after low-calorie-diet-induced weight loss: the SCALE Maintenance randomized
study. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013;37(11):1443-1451.
423. Rubino F, Nathan DM, Eckel RH, et al. Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for
Type 2 Diabetes: A Joint Statement by International Diabetes Organizations. Diabetes Care.
2016;39(6):861-877.
424. Lakdawala M, Bhasker A. Report: Asian Consensus Meeting on Metabolic Surgery.
Recommendations for the use of Bariatric and Gastrointestinal Metabolic Surgery for
Treatment of Obesity and Type II Diabetes Mellitus in the Asian Population: August 9th and
10th, 2008, Trivandrum, India. Obes Surg. 2010;20(7):929-936.
425. Mechanick JI, Kushner RF, Sugerman HJ, et al. American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists, The Obesity Society, and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery
Medical Guidelines for Clinical Practice for the Perioperative Nutirtional, Metabolic, and Nonsurgical Support of the Bariatric Surgery Patient. Obesity 2009;17(Suppl 1):S1-S70.
426. Buchwald H, Avidor Y, Braunwald E, et al. Bariatric surgery: a systematic review and metaanalysis. JAMA. 2004;292(14):1724-1737.
427. Chang SH, Stoll CR, Song J, Varela JE, Eagon CJ, Colditz GA. The effectiveness and risks of
bariatric surgery: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis, 2003-2012. JAMA Surg.
2014;149(3):275-287.
428. Elder KA, Wolfe BM. Bariatric surgery: a review of procedures and outcomes. Gastroenterology.
2007;132(6):2253-2271.
429. Colquitt JL, Picot J, Loveman E, Clegg AJ. Surgery for obesity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2009(2):Cd003641.
REFERENCES
430. O’Brien PE, Hindle A, Brennan L, et al. Long-Term Outcomes After Bariatric Surgery: a
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Weight Loss at 10 or More Years for All Bariatric
Procedures and a Single-Centre Review of 20-Year Outcomes After Adjustable Gastric Banding.
Obes Surg. 2019;29(1):3-14.
431. Lee WJ, Chong K, Ser KH, et al. Gastric bypass vs sleeve gastrectomy for type 2 diabetes
mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Surg. 2011;146(2):143-148.
432. Schauer PR, Kashyap SR, Wolski K, et al. Bariatric surgery versus intensive medical therapy in
obese patients with diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(17):1567-1576.
433. Ikramuddin S, Korner J, Lee WJ, et al. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass vs intensive medical
management for the control of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia: the
Diabetes Surgery Study randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;309(21):2240-2249.
434. Liang Z, Wu Q, Chen B, Yu P, Zhao H, Ouyang X. Effect of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
surgery on type 2 diabetes mellitus with hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract. 2013;101(1):50-56.
435. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, et al. Bariatric Surgery versus Intensive Medical Therapy for
Diabetes — 5-Year Outcomes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2017;376(7):641-651.
436. Sjostrom L, Lindroos AK, Peltonen M, et al. Lifestyle, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk factors
10 years after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(26):2683-2693.
437. Sultan S, Gupta D, Parikh M, et al. Five-year outcomes of patients with type 2 diabetes who
underwent laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2010;6(4):373-376.
438. Sugerman HJ, Wolfe LG, Sica DA, Clore JN. Diabetes and hypertension in severe obesity and
effects of gastric bypass-induced weight loss. Ann Surg. 2003;237(6):751-756; discussion 757-758.
439. Steffen R, Potoczna N, Bieri N, Horber FF. Successful Multi-Intervention Treatment of Severe
Obesity: A 7-year Prospective Study with 96% Follow-up. Obesity Surgery. 2009;19(1):3-12.
440. Bolen SD, Chang H-Y, Weiner JP, et al. Clinical Outcomes after Bariatric Surgery: A Five-Year
Matched Cohort Analysis in Seven US States. Obesity Surgery. 2012;22(5):749-763.
441. Furuya Jr CK, De Oliveira CPMS, De Mello ES, et al. Effects of bariatric surgery on nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease: Preliminary findings after 2 years. Journal of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology. 2007;22(4):510-514.
442. Vest AR, Heneghan HM, Schauer PR, Young JB. Surgical management of obesity and the
relationship to cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2013;127(8):945-959.
443. Lee WJ, Hur KY, Lakadawala M, et al. Predicting success of metabolic surgery: age, body mass
index, C-peptide, and duration score. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(3):379-384.
444. Wong VW, Chan WK, Chitturi S, et al. Asia-Pacific Working Party on Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver
Disease guidelines 2017-Part 1: Definition, risk factors and assessment. J Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2018;33(1):70-85.
445. Chan WK, Treeprasertsuk S, Imajo K, et al. Clinical features and treatment of nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease across the Asia Pacific region-the GO ASIA initiative. Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2018;47(6):816-825.
446. Wong RJ, Cheung R, Ahmed A. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis is the most rapidly growing
indication for liver transplantation in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma in the U.S.
Hepatology. 2014;59(6):2188-2195.
447. Wong RJ, Aguilar M, Cheung R, et al. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis is the second leading
etiology of liver disease among adults awaiting liver transplantation in the United States.
Gastroenterology. 2015;148(3):547-555.
448. Chan WK, Tan AT, Vethakkan SR, Tah PC, Vijayananthan A, Goh KL. Non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease in diabetics--prevalence and predictive factors in a multiracial hospital clinic population
in Malaysia. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;28(8):1375-1383.
449. Lai LL, Wan Yusoff WNI, Vethakkan SR, Nik Mustapha NR, Mahadeva S, Chan WK. Screening
for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus using transient
elastography. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;34(8):1396-1403.
450. Loo SY, Chan WK. Emerging new standard for non-invasive assessment of liver disease
mortality in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr. 2017;6(2):135-137.
451. Wong VW, Wong GL, Tsang SW, et al. Metabolic and histological features of non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease patients with different serum alanine aminotransferase levels. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther. 2009;29(4):387-396.
REFERENCES
452. Chan WK, Treeprasertsuk S, Goh GB, et al. Optimizing Use of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
Fibrosis Score, Fibrosis-4 Score, and Liver Stiffness Measurement to Identify Patients With
Advanced Fibrosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;17(12):2570-2580.e2537.
453. Castera L, Friedrich-Rust M, Loomba R. Noninvasive Assessment of Liver Disease in Patients
With Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. Gastroenterology. 2019;156(5):1264-1281.e1264.
454. Wong VW, Irles M, Wong GL, et al. Unified interpretation of liver stiffness measurement by M
and XL probes in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Gut. 2019;68(11):2057-2064.
455. Vilar-Gomez E, Martinez-Perez Y, Calzadilla-Bertot L, et al. Weight Loss Through Lifestyle
Modification Significantly Reduces Features of Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology.
2015;149(2):367-378.e365; quiz e314-365.
456. George ES, Forsyth A, Itsiopoulos C, et al. Practical Dietary Recommendations for the
Prevention and Management of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease in Adults. Adv Nutr.
2018;9(1):30-40.
457. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Ong J, et al. Effects of Alcohol Consumption and Metabolic
Syndrome on Mortality in Patients With Nonalcoholic and Alcohol-Related Fatty Liver Disease.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;17(8):1625-1633.e1621.
458. Garber CE, Blissmer B, Deschenes MR, et al. American College of Sports Medicine position
stand. Quantity and quality of exercise for developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory,
musculoskeletal, and neuromotor fitness in apparently healthy adults: guidance for prescribing
exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43(7):1334-1359.
459. Duncan MS, Freiberg MS, Greevy RA, Jr., Kundu S, Vasan RS, Tindle HA. Association of Smoking
Cessation With Subsequent Risk of Cardiovascular Disease. JAMA. 2019;322(7):642-650.
460. Armstrong MJ, Gaunt P, Aithal GP, et al. Liraglutide safety and efficacy in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (LEAN): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled
phase 2 study. Lancet. 2016;387(10019):679-690.
461. Kuchay MS, Krishan S, Mishra SK, et al. Effect of Empagliflozin on Liver Fat in Patients With
Type 2 Diabetes and Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: A Randomized Controlled Trial (E-LIFT
Trial). Diabetes Care. 2018;41(8):1801-1808.
462. Lai L-L, Vethakkan SR, Nik Mustapha NR, Mahadeva S, Chan W-K. Empagliflozin for the
Treatment of Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Digestive
Diseases and Sciences. 2020;65(2):623-631.
463. Sanyal AJ, Chalasani N, Kowdley KV, et al. Pioglitazone, vitamin E, or placebo for nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(18):1675-1685.
464. Bril F, Biernacki DM, Kalavalapalli S, et al. Role of Vitamin E for Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis
in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Diabetes Care.
2019;42(8):1481-1488.
465. Stahl EP, Dhindsa DS, Lee SK, Sandesara PB, Chalasani NP, Sperling LS. Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver
Disease and the Heart: JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73(8):948-963.
466. Mahfood Haddad T, Hamdeh S, Kanmanthareddy A, Alla VM. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
and the risk of clinical cardiovascular events: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes
Metab Syndr. 2017;11 Suppl 1:S209-s216.
467. Targher G, Byrne CD, Lonardo A, Zoppini G, Barbui C. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and risk
of incident cardiovascular disease: A meta-analysis. J Hepatol. 2016;65(3):589-600.
468. Khoo S, Wong VW, Goh GB, et al. Suboptimal treatment of dyslipidemia in patients with
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;35(2):320-325.
469. Agiostratidou G, Anhalt H, Ball D, et al. Standardizing Clinically Meaningful Outcome Measures
Beyond HbA(1c) for Type 1 Diabetes: A Consensus Report of the American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists, the American Association of Diabetes Educators, the American
Diabetes Association, the Endocrine Society, JDRF International, The Leona M. and Harry B.
Helmsley Charitable Trust, the Pediatric Endocrine Society, and the T1D Exchange. Diabetes
Care. 2017;40(12):1622-1630.
470. Kinsley BT, Weinger K, Bajaj M, et al. Blood glucose awareness training and epinephrine
responses to hypoglycemia during intensive treatment in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care.
1999;22(7):1022-1028.
REFERENCES
471. Schachinger H, Hegar K, Hermanns N, et al. Randomized controlled clinical trial of
Blood Glucose Awareness Training (BGAT III) in Switzerland and Germany. J Behav Med.
2005;28(6):587-594.
472. Brodows RG, Williams C, Amatruda JM. Treatment of Insulin Reactions in Diabetics. JAMA.
1984;252(24):3378-3381.
473. Slama G, Traynard PY, Desplanque N, et al. The search for an optimized treatment of
hypoglycemia. Carbohydrates in tablets, solutin, or gel for the correction of insulin reactions.
Arch Intern Med. 1990;150(3):589-593.
474. Joint British Diabetes Societies for inpatient care. The Hopsital Management of Hypoglycaemia
in Adults with Diabetes Mellitus (3rd ed). 2018. Available at http://www.diabetologists-abcd.
org.uk/JBDS/JBDS_HypoGuideline_FINAL_280218.pdf.
475. Kapoor N, Jagan J, Thomas N. Management of hypoglycemia. Current Medical Issues.
2017;15(3):211-215.
476. Ovalle F, Fanelli CG, Paramore DS, Hershey T, Craft S, Cryer PE. Brief twice-weekly episodes of
hypoglycemia reduce detection of clinical hypoglycemia in type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes.
1998;47(9):1472-1479.
477. Schopman JE, Geddes J, Frier BM. Prevalence of impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia
and frequency of hypoglycaemia in insulin-treated type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract.
2010;87(1):64-68.
478. Dagogo-Jack S, Fanelli CG, Cryer PE. Durable reversal of hypoglycemia unawareness in type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 1999;22(5):866-867.
479. Dagogo-Jack S, Rattarasarn C, Cryer PE. Reversal of hypoglycemia unawareness, but not
defective glucose counterregulation, in IDDM. Diabetes. 1994;43(12):1426-1434.
480. Davis M, Mellman M, Friedman S, Chang CJ, Shamoon H. Recovery of epinephrine response but
not hypoglycemic symptom threshold after intensive therapy in type 1 diabetes. Am J Med.
1994;97(6):535-542.
481. Fanelli C, Pampanelli S, Epifano L, et al. Long-term recovery from unawareness, deficient
counterregulation and lack of cognitive dysfunction during hypoglycaemia, following
institution of rational, intensive insulin therapy in IDDM. Diabetologia. 1994;37(12):1265-1276.
482. Fanelli CG, Epifano L, Rambotti AM, et al. Meticulous prevention of hypoglycemia normalizes
the glycemic thresholds and magnitude of most of neuroendocrine responses to, symptoms
of, and cognitive function during hypoglycemia in intensively treated patients with short-term
IDDM. Diabetes. 1993;42(11):1683-1689.
483. Liu D, McManus RM, Ryan EA. Improved counter-regulatory hormonal and symptomatic
responses to hypoglycemia in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus after 3
months of less strict glycemic control. Clin Invest Med. 1996;19(2):71-82.
484. Allen KV, Frier BM. Nocturnal hypoglycemia: clinical manifestations and therapeutic strategies
toward prevention. Endocr Pract. 2003;9(6):530-543.
485. Brunton SA. Nocturnal hypoglycemia: answering the challenge with long-acting insulin analogs.
MedGenMed. 2007;9(2):38.
486. Brod M, Wolden M, Christensen T, Bushnell DM. A nine country study of the burden of nonsevere nocturnal hypoglycaemic events on diabetes management and daily function. Diabetes
Obes Metab. 2013;15(6):546-557.
487. Whitmer RA, Karter AJ, Yaffe K, Quesenberry CP, Jr., Selby JV. Hypoglycemic episodes and risk
of dementia in older patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA. 2009;301(15):1565-1572.
488. Bonds DE, Miller ME, Bergenstal RM, et al. The association between symptomatic, severe
hypoglycaemia and mortality in type 2 diabetes: retrospective epidemiological analysis of the
ACCORD study. BMJ. 2010;340:b4909.
489. Davis SN, Duckworth W, Emanuele N, et al. Effects of Severe Hypoglycemia on Cardiovascular
Outcomes and Death in the Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial. Diabetes Care. 2019;42(1):157-163.
490. Hayward RA, Reaven PD, Wiitala WL, et al. Follow-up of glycemic control and cardiovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(23):2197-2206.
491. Zoungas S, Patel A, Chalmers J, et al. Severe Hypoglycemia and Risks of Vascular Events and
Death. New England Journal of Medicine. 2010;363(15):1410-1418.
REFERENCES
492. Mellbin LG, Ryden L, Riddle MC, et al. Does hypoglycaemia increase the risk of cardiovascular
events? A report from the ORIGIN trial. Eur Heart J. 2013;34(40):3137-3144.
493. Pieber TR, Marso SP, McGuire DK, et al. DEVOTE 3: temporal relationships between severe
hypoglycaemia, cardiovascular outcomes and mortality. Diabetologia. 2018;61(1):58-65.
494. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Ziegenfuss JY, Shah ND, Wermers RA, Smith SA. Increased mortality
of patients with diabetes reporting severe hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(9):1897-1901.
495. Gogitidze Joy N, Hedrington MS, Briscoe VJ, Tate DB, Ertl AC, Davis SN. Effects of acute
hypoglycemia on inflammatory and pro-atherothrombotic biomarkers in individuals with type 1
diabetes and healthy individuals. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(7):1529-1535.
496. Wright RJ, Newby DE, Stirling D, Ludlam CA, Macdonald IA, Frier BM. Effects of acute insulininduced hypoglycemia on indices of inflammation: putative mechanism for aggravating
vascular disease in diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(7):1591-1597.
497. Koivikko ML, Karsikas M, Salmela PI, et al. Effects of controlled hypoglycaemia on cardiac
repolarisation in patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia. 2008;51(3):426-435.
498. Stahn A, Pistrosch F, Ganz X, et al. Relationship between hypoglycemic episodes and
ventricular arrhythmias in patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases: silent
hypoglycemias and silent arrhythmias. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(2):516-520.
499. Wright RJ, Frier BM. Vascular disease and diabetes: is hypoglycaemia an aggravating factor?
Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2008;24(5):353-363.
500. Kubiak T, Wittig A, Koll C, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring reveals associations of glucose
levels with QT interval length. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2010;12(4):283-286.
501. Frier BM, Schernthaner G, Heller SR. Hypoglycemia and cardiovascular risks. Diabetes Care.
2011;34 Suppl 2:S132-137.
502. Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Miles JM, Fisher JN. Hyperglycemic crises in adult patients with
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(7):1335-1343.
503. Stephens WP, George A, Kenz S, Lee K. The Management of Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Adults.
NHS Trafford Hospital: NHS. Janaury 2012.
504. Kwok R, Sztal-Mazer S, Hopkins RE, et al. Evaluation of NovoRapid infusion as a treatment
option in the management of diabetic ketoacidosis. Intern Med J. 2017;47(11):1317-1320.
505. Joint British Diabetes Societies Inpatient Care Group. The Management of Diabetic
Ketoacidosis in Adults (2nd ed). 2013.
506. Doshi P, Potter AJ, De Los Santos D, Banuelos R, Darger BF, Chathampally Y. Prospective
randomized trial of insulin glargine in acute management of diabetic ketoacidosis in the
emergency department: a pilot study. Acad Emerg Med. 2015;22(6):657-662.
507. Silinskie KM, Kirshner R, Hite MS. Converting continuous insulin infusion to subcutaneous
insulin glargine after cardiac surgery using percentage-based versus weight-based dosing: a
pilot trial. Ann Pharmacother. 2013;47(1):20-28.
508. Umpierrez GE, Murphy MB, Kitabchi AE. Diabetic Ketoacidosis and Hyperglycemic
Hyperosmolar Syndrome. Diabetes Spectrum. 2002;15(1):28-36.
509. Munro JF, Campbell IW, McCuish AC, Duncan LJ. Euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis. Br Med J.
1973;2(5866):578-580.
510. Modi A, Agrawal A, Morgan F. Euglycemic Diabetic Ketoacidosis: A Review. Curr Diabetes Rev.
2017;13(3):315-321.
511. Barski L, Eshkoli T, Brandstaetter E, Jotkowitz A. Euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis. Eur J Intern
Med. 2019;63:9-14.
512. Chico A, Herranz L, Corcoy R, et al. Glycemic control and maternal and fetal outcomes in
pregnant women with type 1 diabetes according to the type of basal insulin. European Journal
of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology. 2016;206:84-91.
513. Oliver R, Jagadeesan P, Howard RJ, Nikookam K. Euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis in
pregnancy: an unusual presentation. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2007;27(3):308.
514. Wang Y, Desai M, Ryan PB, et al. Incidence of diabetic ketoacidosis among patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus treated with SGL T2 inhibitors and other antihyperglycemic agents. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract. 2017;128:83-90.
REFERENCES
515. Burke KR, Schumacher CA, Harpe SE. SGL T2 Inhibitors: A Systematic Review of Diabetic
Ketoacidosis and Related Risk Factors in the Primary Literature. Pharmacotherapy.
2017;37(2):187-194.
516. Limenta M, Ho CSC, Poh JWW, Goh SY, Toh DSL. Adverse Drug Reaction Profile of SGL T2
Inhibitor-Associated Diabetic Ketosis/Ketoacidosis in Singapore and their Precipitating Factors.
Clin Drug Investig. 2019;39(7):683-690.
517. Joint British Diabetes Societies Inpatient Care Group. The management of the hyperosmolar
hyperglycaemia state 9HHS) in adults with diabetes. 2012.
518. Ekpebegh CO, Longo-Mbenza B, Akinrinmade A, Blanco-Blanco E, Badri M, Levitt NS.
Hyperglycaemic crisis in the Eastern Cape province of South Africa: high mortality and
association of hyperosmolar ketoacidosis with a new diagnosis of diabetes. S Afr Med J.
2010;100(12):822-826.
519. Fourtner SH, Weinzimer SA, Levitt Katz LE. Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar non-ketotic syndrome
in children with type 2 diabetes*. Pediatr Diabetes. 2005;6(3):129-135.
520. Chung ST, Perue GG, Johnson A, et al. Predictors of hyperglycaemic crises and their associated
mortality in Jamaica. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2006;73(2):184-190.
521. Ekpebegh C, Longo-Mbenza B. Mortality in hyperglycemic crisis: a high association with
infections and cerebrovascular disease. Minerva Endocrinol. 2013;38(2):187-193.
522. MacIsaac RJ, Lee L Y, McNeil KJ, Tsalamandris C, Jerums G. Influence of age on the presentation and
outcome of acidotic and hyperosmolar diabetic emergencies. Intern Med J. 2002;32(8):379-385.
523. O’Malley G, Moran C, Draman MS, et al. Central pontine myelinolysis complicating treatment of
the hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state. Ann Clin Biochem. 2008;45(Pt 4):440-443.
524. Cokar O, Aydin B, Ozer F. Non-ketotic hyperglycaemia presenting as epilepsia partialis continua.
Seizure. 2004;13(4):264-269.
525. Dhatariya KK, Vellanki P. Treatment of Diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA)/Hyperglycemic
Hyperosmolar State (HHS): Novel Advances in the Management of Hyperglycemic Crises (UK
Versus USA). Curr Diab Rep. 2017;17(5):33.
526. Ennis ED, Stahl E.J, Kreisberg RA. The hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic syndrome. Diabetes Rev.
1994; 2:115-126.
527. Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Murphy MB, et al. Management of Hyperglycemic Crises in Patients
With Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(1):131-153.
528. Xu J, Xu L, Wang YX, You QS, Jonas JB, Wei WB. Ten-year cumulative incidence of diabetic
retinopathy. The Beijing Eye Study 2001/2011. PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e111320.
529. Stratton IM, Kohner EM, Aldington SJ, et al. UKPDS 50: risk factors for incidence and
progression of retinopathy in Type II diabetes over 6 years from diagnosis. Diabetologia.
2001;44(2):156-163.
530. Estacio RO, McFarling E, Biggerstaff S, Jeffers BW, Johnson D, Schrier RW. Overt albuminuria
predicts diabetic retinopathy in Hispanics with NIDDM. Am J Kidney Dis. 1998;31(6):947-953.
531. Leske MC, Wu SY, Hennis A, et al. Hyperglycemia, blood pressure, and the 9-year incidence of
diabetic retinopathy: the Barbados Eye Studies. Ophthalmology. 2005;112(5):799-805.
532. World Health Organization. Prevention Of Blindness From Diabetes Mellitus. Geneva: WHO;
2005:1-36.
533. Goh PP. Status of diabetic retinopathy among diabetics registered to the Diabetic Eye Registry,
National Eye Database, 2007. Med J Malaysia. 2008;63 Suppl C:24-28.
534. Tan M, Ng O, Wong T, A Rahman H. Current clinical status and vascualr complications among
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus at tertiary hospitals in Malaysia. British Journal of
Medicine and Medical Research. 2014;4(15):2896-2909.
535. Abougalambou SSI, Mohamed M, Sulaiman SAS, Abougalambou AS, Hassali MA. Current clinical
status and complications among type 2 diabetic patients in Universiti Sains Malaysia hospital.
International Journal of Diabetes Mellitus. 2010;2(3):184-188.
536. Klein R, Klein BE, Moss SE, Davis MD, DeMets DL. The Wisconsin Epidemiologic Study
of Diabetic Retinopathy. VII. Diabetic nonproliferative retinal lesions. Ophthalmology.
1987;94(11):1389-1400.
REFERENCES
537. Klein R, Klein BE, Moss SE, Davis MD, DeMets DL. The Wisconsin Epidemiologic Study of
Diabetic Retinopathy. X. Four-year incidence and progression of diabetic retinopathy when age
at diagnosis is 30 years or more. Arch Ophthalmol. 1989;107(2):244-249.
538. Wong TY, Sun J, Kawasaki R, et al. Guidelines on Diabetic Eye Care: The International Council of
Ophthalmology Recommendations for Screening, Follow-up, Referral, and Treatment Based on
Resource Settings. Ophthalmology. 2018;125(10):1608-1622.
539. Malaysian Society of Ophthalmology. Screening of Diabetic Retinopathy. Ministry of Health
Malaysia; 2011.
540. Buxton MJ, Sculpher MJ, Ferguson BA, et al. Screening for treatable diabetic retinopathy: a
comparison of different methods. Diabet Med. 1991;8(4):371-377.
541. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive blood-glucose control with
sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in
patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet. 1998;352(9131):837-853.
542. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews DR, Neil HA. 10-year follow-up of intensive glucose
control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(15):1577-1589.
543. Avgerinos I, Karagiannis T, Malandris K, et al. Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists and
microvascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes
Obes Metab. 2019;21(1):188-193.
544. Bain SC, Klufas MA, Ho A, Matthews DR. Worsening of diabetic retinopathy with rapid
improvement in systemic glucose control: A review. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2019;21(3):454-466.
545. Feldman-Billard S, Larger E, Massin P. Early worsening of diabetic retinopathy after rapid
improvement of blood glucose control in patients with diabetes. Diabetes Metab. 2018;44(1):4-14.
546. Shurter A, Genter P, Ouyang D, Ipp E. Euglycemic progression: worsening of diabetic retinopathy
in poorly controlled type 2 diabetes in minorities. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2013;100(3):362-367.
547. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group (UKPDS). Tight blood pressure control and risk
of macrovascular and microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. BMJ.
1998;317(7160):703-713.
548. Do DV, Wang X, Vedula SS, et al. Blood pressure control for diabetic retinopathy. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2015;1:Cd006127.
549. Ogawa H, Nakayama M, Morimoto T, et al. Low-dose aspirin for primary prevention of
atherosclerotic events in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2008;300(18):2134-2141.
550. The Diabetic Retinopathy Study Research Group. Preliminary report on effects of
photocoagulation therapy. Am J Ophthalmol. 1976;81(4):383-396.
551. Schmidt-Erfurth U, Garcia-Arumi J, Bandello F, et al. Guidelines for the Management of Diabetic
Macular Edema by the European Society of Retina Specialists (EURETINA). Ophthalmologica.
2017;237(4):185-222.
552. Virgili G, Parravano M, Menchini F, Evans JR. Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor for
diabetic macular oedema. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014(10):Cd007419.
553. Nguyen QD, Brown DM, Marcus DM, et al. Ranibizumab for diabetic macular edema: results
from 2 phase III randomized trials: RISE and RIDE. Ophthalmology. 2012;119(4):789-801.
554. Wells JA, Glassman AR, Ayala AR, et al. Aflibercept, bevacizumab, or ranibizumab for diabetic
macular edema. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(13):1193-1203.
555. Gall MA, Rossing P, Skott P, et al. Prevalence of micro- and macroalbuminuria, arterial
hypertension, retinopathy and large vessel disease in European type 2 (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetic patients. Diabetologia. 1991;34(9):655-661.
556. Fox CS, Matsushita K, Woodward M, et al. Associations of kidney disease measures with
mortality and end-stage renal disease in individuals with and without diabetes: a meta-analysis.
Lancet. 2012;380(9854):1662-1673.
557. Nichols GA, Vupputuri S, Lau H. Medical Care Costs Associated With Progression of Diabetic
Nephropathy. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(11):2374-2378.
558. Tuttle KR, Bakris GL, Bilous RW, et al. Diabetic kidney disease: a report from an ADA Consensus
Conference. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(10):2864-2883.
559. Kramer HJ, Nguyen QD, Curhan G, Hsu CY. Renal insufficiency in the absence of albuminuria
and retinopathy among adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA. 2003;289(24):3273-3277.
REFERENCES
560. He F, Xia X, Wu XF, Yu XQ, Huang FX. Diabetic retinopathy in predicting diabetic nephropathy in
patients with type 2 diabetes and renal disease: a meta-analysis. Diabetologia. 2013;56(3):457-466.
561. Malaysian Ministry of Health. Malaysian Clinical Practice Guideline on Management of Chronic
Kidney Disease (2nd ed). 2018.
562. Chaiken RL, Khawaja R, Bard M, Eckert-Norton M, Banerji MA, Lebovitz HE. Utility of untimed
urinary albumin measurements in assessing albuminuria in black NIDDM subjects. Diabetes
Care. 1997;20(5):709-713.
563. Levey AS, Coresh J, Greene T, et al. Using standardized serum creatinine values in the
modification of diet in renal disease study equation for estimating glomerular filtration rate.
Ann Intern Med. 2006;145(4):247-254.
564. Jalalonmuhali M, Lim SK, Md Shah MN, Ng KP. MDRD vs. CKD-EPI in comparison to
(51)Chromium EDTA: a cross sectional study of Malaysian CKD cohort. BMC Nephrol.
2017;18(1):363.
565. International Society of Nephrology. Kidney Disease Outcomes Improving Global Outcomes.
2013. Available at https://kdigo.org/guidelines/ckd-evaluation-and-management/. Accessed
February 2020.
566. Delanaye P, Glassock RJ, Pottel H, Rule AD. An Age-Calibrated Definition of Chronic Kidney
Disease: Rationale and Benefits. Clin Biochem Rev. 2016;37(1):17-26.
567. Adler AI, Stratton IM, Neil HAW, et al. Association of systolic blood pressure with macrovascular
and microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 36): prospective observational
study. BMJ. 2000;321(7258):412-419.
568. Wright JT, Jr., Bakris G, Greene T, et al. Effect of blood pressure lowering and antihypertensive
drug class on progression of hypertensive kidney disease: results from the AASK trial. JAMA.
2002;288(19):2421-2431.
569. Peterson JC, Adler S, Burkart JM, et al. Blood pressure control, proteinuria, and the
progression of renal disease. The Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study. Ann Intern Med.
1995;123(10):754-762.
570. Imai E, Ito S, Haneda M, et al. Effects of blood pressure on renal and cardiovascular outcomes
in Asian patients with type 2 diabetes and overt nephropathy: a post hoc analysis (ORIENTblood pressure). Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2016;31(3):447-454.
571. Holtkamp FA, de Zeeuw D, de Graeff PA, et al. Albuminuria and blood pressure, independent
targets for cardioprotective therapy in patients with diabetes and nephropathy: a post hoc
analysis of the combined RENAAL and IDNT trials. Eur Heart J. 2011;32(12):1493-1499.
572. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Bain RP, Rohde RD. The effect of angiotensin-converting-enzyme
inhibition on diabetic nephropathy. The Collaborative Study Group. N Engl J Med.
1993;329(20):1456-1462.
573. Appel LJ, Wright JT, Greene T, et al. Intensive Blood-Pressure Control in Hypertensive Chronic
Kidney Disease. New England Journal of Medicine. 2010;363(10):918-929.
574. de Galan BE, Zoungas S, Chalmers J, et al. Cognitive function and risks of cardiovascular disease
and hypoglycaemia in patients with type 2 diabetes: the Action in Diabetes and Vascular
Disease: Preterax and Diamicron Modified Release Controlled Evaluation (ADVANCE) trial.
Diabetologia. 2009;52(11):2328-2336.
575. Bakris GL, Weir MR, Shanifar S, et al. Effects of blood pressure level on progression of diabetic
nephropathy: results from the RENAAL study. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163(13):1555-1565.
576. Mancia G, Laurent S, Agabiti-Rosei E, et al. Reappraisal of European guidelines on hypertension
management: a European Society of Hypertension Task Force document. J Hypertens.
2009;27(11):2121-2158.
577. Guh JY. Proteinuria versus albuminuria in chronic kidney disease. Nephrology (Carlton). 2010;15
Suppl 2:53-56.
578. Wu HY, Peng CL, Chen PC, et al. Comparative effectiveness of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors versus angiotensin II receptor blockers for major renal outcomes in patients with
diabetes: A 15-year cohort study. PLoS One. 2017;12(5):e0177654.
579. Bhandari S, Ives N, Brettell EA, et al. Multicentre randomized controlled trial of angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitor/angiotensin receptor blocker withdrawal in advanced renal
disease: the STOP-ACEi trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2016;31(2):255-261.
REFERENCES
580. Yusuf S, Teo KK, Pogue J, et al. Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular
events. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(15):1547-1559.
581. Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al. Combined angiotensin inhibition for the treatment of
diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(20):1892-1903.
582. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Chan JC, et al. Effect of Finerenone on Albuminuria in Patients With
Diabetic Nephropathy: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2015;314(9):884-894.
583. Williams B, MacDonald TM, Morant S, et al. Spironolactone versus placebo, bisoprolol, and
doxazosin to determine the optimal treatment for drug-resistant hypertension (PATHWAY-2): a
randomised, double-blind, crossover trial. Lancet. 2015;386(10008):2059-2068.
584. Filippatos G, Anker SD, Bohm M, et al. A randomized controlled study of finerenone vs.
eplerenone in patients with worsening chronic heart failure and diabetes mellitus and/or
chronic kidney disease. Eur Heart J. 2016;37(27):2105-2114.
585. Bolignano D, Palmer SC, Navaneethan SD, Strippoli GF. Aldosterone antagonists for preventing
the progression of chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014(4):Cd007004.
586. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA drug safety communication: FDA revises warnings
regarding use of the diabetes medicine metformin in certain patients with reduced kidney
function, 2016.
587. Zelniker TA, Braunwald E. Cardiac and Renal Effects of Sodium-Glucose Co-Transporter 2
Inhibitors in Diabetes: JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72(15):1845-1855.
588. Heerspink HJ, Desai M, Jardine M, Balis D, Meininger G, Perkovic V. Canagliflozin Slows
Progression of Renal Function Decline Independently of Glycemic Effects. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2017;28(1):368-375.
589. Mosenzon O, Wiviott SD, Cahn A, et al. Effects of dapagliflozin on development and
progression of kidney disease in patients with type 2 diabetes: an analysis from the DECLARETIMI 58 randomised trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2019;7(8):606-617.
590. Gerstein HC, Colhoun HM, Dagenais GR, et al. Dulaglutide and renal outcomes in type 2
diabetes: an exploratory analysis of the REWIND randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet.
2019;394(10193):131-138.
591. ClinicalTrials.gov. A research study to see how Semaglutide works compared to placebo
in peopme with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Chronic Kidney Disease. Available at https://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03819153. Accessed March 2020.
592. Kasiske BL, Lakatua JD, Ma JZ, Louis TA. A meta-analysis of the effects of dietary protein
restriction on the rate of decline in renal function. Am J Kidney Dis. 1998;31(6):954-961.
593. Klahr S, Levey AS, Beck GJ, et al. The effects of dietary protein restriction and blood-pressure
control on the progression of chronic renal disease. Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study
Group. N Engl J Med. 1994;330(13):877-884.
594. Nilsson E, Gasparini A, Arnlov J, et al. Incidence and determinants of hyperkalemia and
hypokalemia in a large healthcare system. Int J Cardiol. 2017;245:277-284.
595. Mills KT, Chen J, Yang W, et al. Sodium Excretion and the Risk of Cardiovascular Disease in
Patients With Chronic Kidney Disease. JAMA. 2016;315(20):2200-2210.
596. Smart NA, Dieberg G, Ladhani M, Titus T. Early referral to specialist nephrology services
for preventing the progression to end-stage kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2014(6):Cd007333.
597. Pop-Busui R, Boulton AJM, Feldman EL, et al. Diabetic Neuropathy: A Position Statement by the
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care. 2017;40(1):136-154.
598. England J, Gronseth G, Franklin G, et al. Distal symmetric polyneuropathy: A definition for
clinical research: Report of the American Academy of Neurology, the American Association
of Electrodiagnostic Medicine, and the American Acedemy of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation. Neurology. 2005;65:199-207.
599. Perkins BA, Olaleye D, Zinman B, Bril V. Simple screening tests for peripheral neuropathy in the
diabetes clinic. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(2):250-256.
600. Pop-Busui R, Lu J, Brooks MM, et al. Impact of Glycemic Control Strategies on the Progression
of Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy in the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2
Diabetes (BARI 2D) Cohort. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(10):3208-3215.
REFERENCES
601. Martin CL, Albers J, Herman WH, et al. Neuropathy Among the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial Cohort 8 Years After Trial Completion. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(2):340-344.
602. Herman WH, Pop-Busui R, Braffett BH, et al. Use of the Michigan Neuropathy Screening
Instrument as a measure of distal symmetrical peripheral neuropathy in Type 1 diabetes:
results from the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications. Diabet Med. 2012;29(7):937-944.
603. Malaysian Association for the Study of Pain. Malaysian Guidelines on Management of
Neuropathic Pain (2nd ed). 2012.
604. Freynhagen R, Baron R, Gockel U, Tolle TR. painDETECT: a new screening questionnaire
to identify neuropathic components in patients with back pain. Curr Med Res Opin.
2006;22(10):1911-1920.
605. Bouhassira D, Attal N, Alchaar H, et al. Comparison of pain syndromes associated with nervous
or somatic lesions and development of a new neuropathic pain diagnostic questionnaire (DN4).
Pain. 2005;114(1-2):29-36.
606. Bennett M. The LANSS Pain Scale: the Leeds assessment of neuropathic symptoms and signs.
Pain. 2001;92(1-2):147-157.
607. Portenoy R. Development and testing of a neuropathic pain screening questionnaire: ID Pain.
Curr Med Res Opin. 2006;22(8):1555-1565.
608. The LOOK AHEAD Study Group. Effects of a long-term lifestyle modification programme on
peripheral neuropathy in overweight or obese adults with type 2 diabetes: the Look AHEAD
study. Diabetologia. 2017;60(6):980-988.
609. Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Long-term effects of lifestyle intervention or
metformin on diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015;3(11):866-875.
610. Ismail-Beigi F, Craven T, Banerji MA, et al. Effect of intensive treatment of hyperglycaemia
on microvascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes: an analysis of the ACCORD randomised trial.
Lancet. 2010;376(9739):419-430.
611. Chaparro LE, Wiffen PJ, Moore RA, Gilron I. Combination pharmacotherapy for the treatment
of neuropathic pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012(7):Cd008943.
612. Bansal D, Bhansali A, Hota D, Chakrabarti A, Dutta P. Amitriptyline vs. pregabalin in painful
diabetic neuropathy: a randomized double blind clinical trial. Diabet Med. 2009;26(10):1019-1026.
613. British Medical Association and the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain. British
National Formulary. 69th ed. United Kingdom: BMJ Publishing Group; 2015.
614. Freeman R, Durso-Decruz E, Emir B. Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of pregabalin treatment
for painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy: findings from seven randomized, controlled trials
across a range of doses. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(7):1448-1454.
615. Rosenstock J, Tuchman M, LaMoreaux L, Sharma U. Pregabalin for the treatment of painful diabetic
peripheral neuropathy: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Pain. 2004;110(3):628-638.
616. Richter RW, Portenoy R, Sharma U, Lamoreaux L, Bockbrader H, Knapp LE. Relief of painful
diabetic peripheral neuropathy with pregabalin: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Pain.
2005;6(4):253-260.
617. Backonja M, Beydoun A, Edwards KR, et al. Gabapentin for the symptomatic treatment of
painful neuropathy in patients with diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
1998;280(21):1831-1836.
618. Davison SN. Clinical Pharmacology Considerations in Pain Management in Patients with Advanced
Kidney Failure. Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology. 2019;14(6):917-931.
619. Smith T, Nicholson RA. Review of duloxetine in the management of diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2007;3(6):833-844.
620. Goldstein DJ, Lu Y, Detke MJ, Lee TC, Iyengar S. Duloxetine vs. placebo in patients with painful
diabetic neuropathy. Pain. 2005;116(1-2):109-118.
621. Wernicke JF, Pritchett YL, D’Souza DN, et al. A randomized controlled trial of duloxetine in
diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain. Neurology. 2006;67(8):1411-1420.
622. Max MB, Culnane M, Schafer SC, et al. Amitriptyline relieves diabetic neuropathy pain in
patients with normal or depressed mood. Neurology. 1987;37(4):589-596.
REFERENCES
623. Boyle J, Eriksson MEV, Gribble L, et al. Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Comparison of
Amitriptyline, Duloxetine, and Pregabalin in Patients With Chronic Diabetic Peripheral
Neuropathic Pain. Impact on pain, polysomnographic sleep, daytime functioning, and quality of
life. 2012;35(12):2451-2458.
624. Max MB, Lynch SA, Muir J, Shoaf SE, Smoller B, Dubner R. Effects of desipramine, amitriptyline,
and fluoxetine on pain in diabetic neuropathy. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(19):1250-1256.
625. Vinik AI, Shapiro DY, Rauschkolb C, et al. A randomized withdrawal, placebo-controlled study
evaluating the efficacy and tolerability of tapentadol extended release in patients with chronic
painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(8):2302-2309.
626. Schwartz S, Etropolski M, Shapiro DY, et al. Safety and efficacy of tapentadol ER in patients
with painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy: results of a randomized-withdrawal, placebocontrolled trial. Curr Med Res Opin. 2011;27(1):151-162.
627. Freeman R, Raskin P, Hewitt DJ, et al. Randomized study of tramadol/acetaminophen versus
placebo in painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Curr Med Res Opin. 2007;23(1):147-161.
628. Gimbel JS, Richards P, Portenoy RK. Controlled-release oxycodone for pain in diabetic
neuropathy. A randomized controlled trial. 2003;60(6):927-934.
629. Bril V, Breiner A, Perkins BA, Zochodne D. Neuropathy. Canadian Journal of Diabetes.
2018;42:S217-S221.
630. Spallone V, Ziegler D, Freeman R, et al. Cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in diabetes:
clinical impact, assessment, diagnosis, and management. Diabetes Metab Res Rev.
2011;27(7):639-653.
631. Camilleri M, Parkman HP, Shafi MA, Abell TL, Gerson L. Clinical guideline: management of
gastroparesis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2013;108(1):18-37; quiz 38.
632. Gæde P, Vedel P, Larsen N, Jensen GVH, Parving H-H, Pedersen O. Multifactorial Intervention
and Cardiovascular Disease in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine.
2003;348(5):383-393.
633. Shen WK, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for the Evaluation and
Management of Patients With Syncope: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm
Society. Circulation. 2017;136(5):e60-e122.
634. Grossman DC, Curry SJ, Owens DK, et al. Interventions to Prevent Falls in CommunityDwelling Older Adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA.
2018;319(16):1696-1704.
635. Homko CJ, Duffy F, Friedenberg FK, Boden G, Parkman HP. Effect of dietary fat and food
consistency on gastroparesis symptoms in patients with gastroparesis. Neurogastroenterol
Motil. 2015;27(4):501-508.
636. Maganti K, Onyemere K, Jones MP. Oral erythromycin and symptomatic relief of gastroparesis:
a systematic review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98(2):259-263.
637. Rao AS, Camilleri M. Review article: metoclopramide and tardive dyskinesia. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther. 2010;31(1):11-19.
638. Camilleri M, Chedid V, Ford AC, et al. Gastroparesis. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018;4(1):41.
639. O’Hare JA, Abuaisha F, Geoghegan M. Prevalence and forms of neuropathic morbidity in 800
diabetics. Irish Journal of Medical Science. 1994;163(3):132-135.
640. Laino C. Diabetic proximal neuropahty: getting at the root of the problem, new insights into
diagnosis and treatment. Neurology Today. 2004;4(2):1-79.
641. Llewelyn D, Llewelyn JG. Diabetic amyotrophy: a painful radiculoplexus neuropathy. Pract
Neurol. 2019;19(2):164-167.
642. Boulton AJ, Vinik AI, Arezzo JC, et al. Diabetic neuropathies: a statement by the American
Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(4):956-962.
643. Barohn RJ, Sahenk Z, Warmolts JR, Mendell JR. The Bruns-Garland syndrome (diabetic
amyotrophy). Revisited 100 years later. Arch Neurol. 1991;48(11):1130-1135.
644. Geiss LS, Herman WH, Smith PJ, National Diabetes Data Group. Diabetes in America. Bethesda,
Md: National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases; 1995:233–257.
REFERENCES
645. Stamler J, Vaccaro O, Neaton JD, Wentworth D. Diabetes, Other Risk Factors, and 12-Yr
Cardiovascular Mortality for Men Screened in the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial.
Diabetes Care. 1993;16(2):434-444.
646. Adlerberth AM, Rosengren A, Wilhelmsen L. Diabetes and long-term risk of mortality from
coronary and other causes in middle-aged Swedish men. A general population study. Diabetes
Care. 1998;21(4):539-545.
647. Haffner SM, Lehto S, Ronnemaa T, Pyorala K, Laakso M. Mortality from coronary heart disease
in subjects with type 2 diabetes and in nondiabetic subjects with and without prior myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med. 1998;339(4):229-234.
648. Lee CD, Folsom AR, Pankow JS, Brancati FL. Cardiovascular events in diabetic and nondiabetic
adults with or without history of myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2004;109(7):855-860.
649. Booth GL, Kapral MK, Fung K, Tu JV. Relation between age and cardiovascular disease in
men and women with diabetes compared with non-diabetic people: a population-based
retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 2006;368(9529):29-36.
650. Miettinen H, Lehto S, Salomaa V, et al. Impact of diabetes on mortality after the first
myocardial infarction. The FINMONICA Myocardial Infarction Register Study Group. Diabetes
Care. 1998;21(1):69-75.
651. Smith JW, Marcus FI, Serokman R. Prognosis of patients with diabetes mellitus after acute
myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 1984;54(7):718-721.
652. Criqui MH, Langer RD, Fronek A, et al. Mortality over a period of 10 years in patients with
peripheral arterial disease. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(6):381-386.
653. Van Belle E, Bauters C, Hubert E, et al. Restenosis rates in diabetic patients: a comparison
of coronary stenting and balloon angioplasty in native coronary vessels. Circulation.
1997;96(5):1454-1460.
654. Investigators TB. Influence of Diabetes on 5-Year Mortality and Morbidity in a Randomized
Trial Comparing CABG and PTCA in Patients With Multivessel Disease. Circulation.
1997;96(6):1761-1769.
655. Perkovic V, Verdon C, Ninomiya T, et al. The relationship between proteinuria and coronary risk:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2008;5(10):e207.
656. Cavender MA, Steg PG, Smith SC, Jr., et al. Impact of Diabetes Mellitus on Hospitalization for
Heart Failure, Cardiovascular Events, and Death: Outcomes at 4 Years From the Reduction of
Atherothrombosis for Continued Health (REACH) Registry. Circulation. 2015;132(10):923-931.
657. McAllister DA, Read SH, Kerssens J, et al. Incidence of Hospitalization for Heart Failure and
Case-Fatality Among 3.25 Million People With and Without Diabetes Mellitus. Circulation.
2018;138(24):2774-2786.
658. Nichols GA, Gullion CM, Koro CE, Ephross SA, Brown JB. The incidence of congestive heart failure
in type 2 diabetes: an update. Diabetes Care. 2004;27(8):1879-1884.
659. Iribarren C, Karter AJ, Go AS, et al. Glycemic control and heart failure among adult patients
with diabetes. Circulation. 2001;103(22):2668-2673.
660. Sarma S, Mentz RJ, Kwasny MJ, et al. Association between diabetes mellitus and post-discharge
outcomes in patients hospitalized with heart failure: findings from the EVEREST trial. Eur J
Heart Fail. 2013;15(2):194-202.
661. Scognamiglio R, Negut C, Ramondo A, Tiengo A, Avogaro A. Detection of coronary
artery disease in asymptomatic patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2006;47(1):65-71.
662. Young LH, Wackers FJ, Chyun DA, et al. Cardiac outcomes after screening for asymptomatic
coronary artery disease in patients with type 2 diabetes: the DIAD study: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2009;301(15):1547-1555.
663. Karmali KN, Persell SD, Perel P, Lloyd-Jones DM, Berendsen MA, Huffman MD. Risk scoring for
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
2017, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD006887. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006887.pub4.
664. Valensi P, Lorgis L, Cottin Y. Prevalence, incidence, predictive factors and prognosis of silent
myocardial infarction: a review of the literature. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2011;104(3):178-188.
REFERENCES
665. Franz MJ, MacLeod J, Evert A, et al. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Nutrition Practice
Guideline for Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes in Adults: Systematic Review of Evidence for Medical
Nutrition Therapy Effectiveness and Recommendations for Integration into the Nutrition Care
Process. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2017;117(10):1659-1679.
666. Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, et al. Cardiovascular effects of intensive lifestyle intervention in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(2):145-154.
667. Hamdy O, Mottalib A, Morsi A, et al. Long-term effect of intensive lifestyle intervention on
cardiovascular risk factors in patients with diabetes in real-world clinical practice: a 5-year
longitudinal study. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care. 2017;5(1):e000259.
668. GBD 2015 Tobacco Collaborators. Smoking prevalence and attributable disease burden in 195
countries and territories, 1990-2015: a systematic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2015. Lancet. 2017;389(10082):1885-1906.
669. Eurich DT, Weir DL, Majumdar SR, et al. Comparative safety and effectiveness of metformin in
patients with diabetes mellitus and heart failure: systematic review of observational studies
involving 34,000 patients. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6(3):395-402.
670. Husain M, Birkenfeld AL, Donsmark M, et al. Oral Semaglutide and Cardiovascular Outcomes in
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(9):841-851.
671. Hernandez AF, Green JB, Janmohamed S, et al. Albiglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in
patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease (Harmony Outcomes): a double-blind,
randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2018;392(10157):1519-1529.
672. Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, et al. SGL T2 inhibitors for primary and secondary prevention of
cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
cardiovascular outcome trials. Lancet. 2019;393(10166):31-39.
673. Fitchett D, Inzucchi SE, Cannon CP, et al. Empagliflozin Reduced Mortality and Hospitalization
for Heart Failure Across the Spectrum of Cardiovascular Risk in the EMPA-REG OUTCOME Trial.
Circulation. 2019;139(11):1384-1395.
674. Figtree GA, Rådholm K, Barrett TD, et al. Effects of Canagliflozin on Heart Failure Outcomes
Associated With Preserved and Reduced Ejection Fraction in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Circulation. 2019;139(22):2591-2593.
675. Kato ET, Silverman MG, Mosenzon O, et al. Effect of Dapagliflozin on Heart Failure and
Mortality in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Circulation. 2019;139(22):2528-2536.
676. Mahaffey KW, Jardine MJ, Bompoint S, et al. Canagliflozin and Cardiovascular and Renal
Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Chronic Kidney Disease in Primary and Secondary
Cardiovascular Prevention Groups. Circulation. 2019;140(9):739-750.
677. CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomised, blinded, trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in
patients at risk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE). Lancet. 1996;348(9038):1329-1339.
678. Trompet S, van Vliet P, de Craen AJ, et al. Pravastatin and cognitive function in the elderly.
Results of the PROSPER study. J Neurol. 2010;257(1):85-90.
679. ASCEND Study Collaborative Group. Effects of Aspirin for Primary Prevention in Persons with
Diabetes Mellitus. New England Journal of Medicine. 2018;379(16):1529-1539.
680. Belch J, MacCuish A, Campbell I, et al. The Prevention of Progression of Arterial Disease and
Diabetes (POPADAD) Trial: Factorial Randomised Placebo Controlled Trial of Aspirin and
Antioxidants in Patients with Diabetes and Asymptomatic Peripheral Arterial Disease. BMJ:
British Medical Journal. 2008;337(7677):1030-1034.
681. Zhang C, Sun A, Zhang P, et al. Aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular events in
patients with diabetes: A meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2010;87(2):211-218.
682. Gaziano JM, Brotons C, Coppolecchia R, et al. Use of aspirin to reduce risk of initial vascular
events in patients at moderate risk of cardiovascular disease (ARRIVE): a randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2018;392(10152):1036-1046.
683. De Berardis G, Sacco M, Strippoli GFM, et al. Aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular
events in people with diabetes: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ.
2009;339:b4531.
684. Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists’ (FTT) Collaborative Group. Indications for fibrinolytic therapy
in suspected acute myocardial infarction: collaborative overview of early mortality and
major morbidity results from all randomised trials of more than 1000 patients. Lancet.
1994;343(8893):311-322.
REFERENCES
685. Hakeem A, Garg N, Bhatti S, Rajpurohit N, Ahmed Z, Uretsky BF. Effectiveness of percutaneous
coronary intervention with drug-eluting stents compared with bypass surgery in diabetics
with multivessel coronary disease: comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized clinical data. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013;2(4):e000354.
686. Head SJ, Milojevic M, Daemen J, et al. Mortality after coronary artery bypass grafting versus
percutaneous coronary intervention with stenting for coronary artery disease: a pooled
analysis of individual patient data. Lancet. 2018;391(10124):939-948.
687. Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, et al. Strategies for Multivessel Revascularization in
Patients with Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2012;367(25):2375-2384.
688. Mahaffey KW, Granger CB, Toth CA, et al. Diabetic retinopathy should not be a contraindication
to thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction: review of ocular hemorrhage
incidence and location in the GUSTO-I trial. Global Utilization of Streptokinase and t-PA for
Occluded Coronary Arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30(7):1606-1610.
689. Williams LS, Rotich J, Qi R, et al. Effects of admission hyperglycemia on mortality and costs in
acute ischemic stroke. Neurology. 2002;59(1):67-71.
690. Woodward M, Zhang X, Barzi F, et al. The effects of diabetes on the risks of major
cardiovascular diseases and death in the Asia-Pacific region. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(2):360-366.
691. Johnston KC, Bruno A, Pauls Q, et al. Intensive vs Standard Treatment of Hyperglycemia and
Functional Outcome in Patients With Acute Ischemic Stroke: The SHINE Randomized Clinical
Trial. JAMA. 2019;322(4):326-335.
692. Dormandy JA, Charbonnel B, Eckland DJ, et al. Secondary prevention of macrovascular events
in patients with type 2 diabetes in the PROactive Study (PROspective pioglitAzone Clinical Trial
In macroVascular Events): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366(9493):1279-1289.
693. Poirier P, Bertrand OF, Leipsic J, Mancini GBJ, Raggi P, Roussin A. Screening for the Presence of
Cardiovascular Disease. Canadian Journal of Diabetes. 2018;42:S170-S177.
694. The International Working Group on the Diabetic Foot. IWGDF Guidelines on the prevention
and management of diabetic foot disease. 2019.
695. Mohammedi K, Woodward M, Zoungas S, et al. Absence of Peripheral Pulses and Risk of Major
Vascular Outcomes in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(12):2270-2277.
696. Criqui MH, Aboyans V. Epidemiology of peripheral artery disease. Circ Res. 2015;116(9):1509-1526.
697. Adler AI, Stevens RJ, Neil A, Stratton IM, Boulton AJ, Holman RR. UKPDS 59: hyperglycemia
and other potentially modifiable risk factors for peripheral vascular disease in type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2002;25(5):894-899.
698. Ministry of Health Malaysia. Clinical Practice Guidelines: Management of diabetic foot (2nd
edition). 2018.
699. Frank U, Nikol S, Belch J, et al. ESVM Guideline on peripheral arterial disease. Vasa.
2019;48(Suppl 102):1-79.
700. Malaysian Ministry of Health. Clinical Practice Guidelines: Management of Diabetic Foot (2nd
ed). 2018.
701. Slovut DP, Sullivan TM. Critical limb ischemia: medical and surgical management. Vasc Med.
2008;13(3):281-291.
702. Anand SS, Bosch J, Eikelboom JW, et al. Rivaroxaban with or without aspirin in patients with
stable peripheral or carotid artery disease: an international, randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Lancet. 2018;391(10117):219-229.
703. Ministry of Health Malaysia. National Diabetes Registry Report (Volume 1) 2009-2012.
704. Letchuman GR, Wan Nazaimoon WM, Wan Mohamad WB, et al. Prevalence of diabetes in the
Malaysian National Health Morbidity Survey III 2006. Med J Malaysia. 2010;65(3):180-186.
705. Boulton AJ, Armstrong DG, Albert SF, et al. Comprehensive foot examination and risk
assessment: a report of the task force of the foot care interest group of the American Diabetes
Association, with endorsement by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists.
Diabetes Care. 2008;31(8):1679-1685.
706. Hingorani A, LaMuraglia GM, Henke P, et al. The management of diabetic foot: A clinical
practice guideline by the Society for Vascular Surgery in collaboration with the American
Podiatric Medical Association and the Society for Vascular Medicine. J Vasc Surg. 2016;63(2
Suppl):3s-21s.
REFERENCES
707. NIH Consensus Conference. Impotence. NIH Consensus Development Panel on Impotence.
JAMA. 1993;270(1):83-90.
708. Lue TF. Erectile dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(24):1802-1813.
709. De Berardis G, Franciosi M, Belfiglio M, et al. Erectile dysfunction and quality of life in type 2
diabetic patients: a serious problem too often overlooked. Diabetes Care. 2002;25(2):284-291.
710. Fedele D, Coscelli C, Santeusanio F, et al. Erectile dysfunction in diabetic subjects in Italy.
Gruppo Italiano Studio Deficit Erettile nei Diabetici. Diabetes Care. 1998;21(11):1973-1977.
711. Bacon CG, Hu FB, Giovannucci E, Glasser DB, Mittleman MA, Rimm EB. Association of type
and duration of diabetes with erectile dysfunction in a large cohort of men. Diabetes Care.
2002;25(8):1458-1463.
712. Siu SC, Lo SK, Wong KW, Ip KM, Wong YS. Prevalence of and risk factors for erectile dysfunction
in Hong Kong diabetic patients. Diabet Med. 2001;18(9):732-738.
713. Cho NH, Ahn CW, Park JY, et al. Prevalence of erectile dysfunction in Korean men with Type 2
diabetes mellitus. Diabet Med. 2006;23(2):198-203.
714. Giuliano FA, Leriche A, Jaudinot EO, de Gendre AS. Prevalence of erectile dysfunction among
7689 patients with diabetes or hypertension, or both. Urology. 2004;64(6):1196-1201.
715. Malavige LS, Jayaratne SD, Kathriarachchi ST, Sivayogan S, Fernando DJ, Levy JC. Erectile
dysfunction among men with diabetes is strongly associated with premature ejaculation and
reduced libido. J Sex Med. 2008;5(9):2125-2134.
716. El-Sakka AI, Tayeb KA. Erectile dysfunction risk factors in noninsulin dependent diabetic Saudi
patients. J Urol. 2003;169(3):1043-1047.
717. Sasaki H, Yamasaki H, Ogawa K, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for erectile dysfunction in
Japanese diabetics. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2005;70(1):81-89.
718. Feldman HA, Goldstein I, Hatzichristou DG, Krane RJ, McKinlay JB. Impotence and its
medical and psychosocial correlates: results of the Massachusetts Male Aging Study. J Urol.
1994;151(1):54-61.
719. Johannes CB, Araujo AB, Feldman HA, Derby CA, Kleinman KP, McKinlay JB. Incidence of
erectile dysfunction in men 40 to 69 years old: longitudinal results from the Massachusetts
male aging study. J Urol. 2000;163(2):460-463.
720. Penson DF, Latini DM, Lubeck DP, Wallace KL, Henning JM, Lue TF. Do impotent men with
diabetes have more severe erectile dysfunction and worse quality of life than the general
population of impotent patients? Results from the Exploratory Comprehensive Evaluation of
Erectile Dysfunction (ExCEED) database. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(4):1093-1099.
721. Goldstein I, Lue TF, Padma-Nathan H, Rosen RC, Steers WD, Wicker PA. Oral sildenafil in the
treatment of erectile dysfunction. Sildenafil Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1998;338(20):1397-1404.
722. Yamada T, Hara K, Umematsu H, Suzuki R, Kadowaki T. Erectile dysfunction and cardiovascular
events in diabetic men: a meta-analysis of observational studies. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e43673.
723. Gandaglia G, Salonia A, Passoni N, Montorsi P, Briganti A, Montorsi F. Erectile dysfunction as a
cardiovascular risk factor in patients with diabetes. Endocrine. 2013;43(2):285-292.
724. Araujo AB, Travison TG, Ganz P, et al. Erectile dysfunction and mortality. J Sex Med.
2009;6(9):2445-2454.
725. Ponikowska B, Jankowska EA, Maj J, et al. Gonadal and adrenal androgen deficiencies as
independent predictors of increased cardiovascular mortality in men with type II diabetes
mellitus and stable coronary artery disease. Int J Cardiol. 2010;143(3):343-348.
726. Zheng H, Fan W, Li G, Tam T. Predictors for erectile dysfunction among diabetics. Diabetes Res
Clin Pract. 2006;71(3):313-319.
727. Roth A, Kalter-Leibovici O, Kerbis Y, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for erectile dysfunction
in men with diabetes, hypertension, or both diseases: a community survey among 1,412 Israeli
men. Clin Cardiol. 2003;26(1):25-30.
728. Romeo JH, Seftel AD, Madhun ZT, Aron DC. Sexual function in men with diabetes type 2:
association with glycemic control. J Urol. 2000;163(3):788-791.
729. Matfin G, Jawa A, Fonseca VA. Erectile dysfunction: interrelationship with the metabolic
syndrome. Curr Diab Rep. 2005;5(1):64-69.
730. Ho CH, Jaw FS, Wu CC, et al. The prevalence and the risk factors of testosterone deficiency in
newly diagnosed and previously known type 2 diabetic men. J Sex Med. 2015;12(2):389-397.
REFERENCES
731. Hackett G, Kirby M, Sinclair AJ. Testosterone deficiency, cardiac health, and older men. Int J
Endocrinol. 2014;2014:143763.
732. Leiblum SR. Principles and Practice of Sex Therapy. Vol 1. New York US: The Guilford Press; 2007.
733. Morales A, Bebb RA, Manjoo P, et al. Diagnosis and management of testosterone deficiency
syndrome in men: clinical practice guideline. Cmaj. 2015;187(18):1369-1377.
734. Rosen RC, Riley A, Wagner G, Osterloh IH, Kirkpatrick J, Mishra A. The international index
of erectile function (IIEF): a multidimensional scale for assessment of erectile dysfunction.
Urology. 1997;49(6):822-830.
735. Lim TO, Das A, Rampal S, et al. Cross-cultural adaptation and validation of the English version
of the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF) for use in Malaysia. Int J Impot Res.
2003;15(5):329-336.
736. Balhara YP, Sarkar S, Gupta R. Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors for erectile dysfunction in patients
with diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2015;19(4):451-461.
737. Wright PJ. Comparison of phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors. Int J Clin Pract.
2006;60(8):967-975.
738. Rendell MS, Rajfer J, Wicker PA, Smith MD. Sildenafil for treatment of erectile dysfunction
in men with diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. Sildenafil Diabetes Study Group. JAMA.
1999;281(5):421-426.
739. Goldstein I, Young JM, Fischer J, Bangerter K, Segerson T, Taylor T. Vardenafil, a new
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, in the treatment of erectile dysfunction in men with
diabetes: a multicenter double-blind placebo-controlled fixed-dose study. Diabetes Care.
2003;26(3):777-783.
740. Saenz de Tejada I, Anglin G, Knight JR, Emmick JT. Effects of tadalafil on erectile dysfunction in
men with diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2002;25(12):2159-2164.
741. Hatzichristou D, Gambla M, Rubio-Aurioles E, et al. Efficacy of tadalafil once daily in men with
diabetes mellitus and erectile dysfunction. Diabet Med. 2008;25(2):138-146.
742. Buvat J, Van Ahlen H, Schmitt H, Chan M, Kuepfer C, Varanese L. Efficacy and Safety of Two
Dosing Regimens of Tadalafil and Patterns of Sexual Activity in Men with Diabetes Mellitus and
Erectile Dysfunction: Scheduled Use vs. On-Demand Regimen Evaluation (SURE) Study in 14
European Countries. The Journal of Sexual Medicine. 2006;3(3):512-520.
743. DeBusk R, Drory Y, Goldstein I, et al. Management of sexual dysfunction in patients with
cardiovascular disease: recommendations of The Princeton Consensus Panel. Am J Cardiol.
2000;86(2):175-181.
744. Isidori AM, Giannetta E, Gianfrilli D, et al. Effects of testosterone on sexual function in men:
results of a meta-analysis. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2005;63(4):381-394.
745. Boyanov MA, Boneva Z, Christov VG. Testosterone supplementation in men with type 2
diabetes, visceral obesity and partial androgen deficiency. Aging Male. 2003;6(1):1-7.
746. Shabsigh R, Kaufman JM, Steidle C, Padma-Nathan H. Randomized study of testosterone gel
as adjunctive therapy to sildenafil in hypogonadal men with erectile dysfunction who do not
respond to sildenafil alone. J Urol. 2004;172(2):658-663.
747. Kalinchenko SY, Kozlov GI, Gontcharov NP, Katsiya GV. Oral testosterone undecanoate reverses
erectile dysfunction associated with diabetes mellitus in patients failing on sildenafil citrate
therapy alone. Aging Male. 2003;6(2):94-99.
748. Basaria S, Harman SM, Travison TG, et al. Effects of Testosterone Administration for 3 Years on
Subclinical Atherosclerosis Progression in Older Men With Low or Low-Normal Testosterone
Levels: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2015;314(6):570-581.
749. Muraleedharan V, Marsh H, Kapoor D, Channer KS, Jones TH. Testosterone deficiency is
associated with increased risk of mortality and testosterone replacement improves survival in
men with type 2 diabetes. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013;169(6):725-733.
750. Shores MM, Smith NL, Forsberg CW, Anawalt BD, Matsumoto AM. Testosterone treatment and
mortality in men with low testosterone levels. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(6):2050-2058.
751. Basson R, Berman J, Burnett A, et al. Report of the international consensus development
conference on female sexual dysfunction: definitions and classifications. J Urol.
2000;163(3):888-893.
REFERENCES
752. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder. 5 ed.
US2014.
753. Dina Muhayidin A, Wong M, Sukor N, Sidi H, Ismail A, Azmi Kamaruddin N. Prevalence of Sexual
Dysfunction Among Premenopausal Women With and Without Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2013;3(1):29-39.
754. Abu Ali RM, Al Hajeri RM, Khader YS, Shegem NS, Ajlouni KM. Sexual dysfunction in Jordanian
diabetic women. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(8):1580-1581.
755. Doruk H, Akbay E, Cayan S, Akbay E, Bozlu M, Acar D. Effect of diabetes mellitus on female
sexual function and risk factors. Arch Androl. 2005;51(1):1-6.
756. Erol B, Tefekli A, Ozbey I, et al. Sexual dysfunction in type II diabetic females: a comparative
study. J Sex Marital Ther. 2002;28 Suppl 1:55-62.
757. Fatemi SS, Taghavi SM. Evaluation of sexual function in women with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Diab Vasc Dis Res. 2009;6(1):38-39.
758. Nowosielski K, Drosdzol A, Sipinski A, Kowalczyk R, Skrzypulec V. Diabetes mellitus and
sexuality--does it really matter? J Sex Med. 2010;7(2 Pt 1):723-735.
759. Olarinoye J, Olarinoye A. Determinants of sexual function among women with type 2 diabetes
in a Nigerian population. J Sex Med. 2008;5(4):878-886.
760. Pontiroli AE, Cortelazzi D, Morabito A. Female sexual dysfunction and diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Sex Med. 2013;10(4):1044-1051.
761. Veronelli A, Mauri C, Zecchini B, et al. Sexual dysfunction is frequent in premenopausal
women with diabetes, obesity, and hypothyroidism, and correlates with markers of increased
cardiovascular risk. A preliminary report. J Sex Med. 2009;6(6):1561-1568.
762. Enzlin P, Rosen R, Wiegel M, et al. Sexual dysfunction in women with type 1 diabetes: long-term
findings from the DCCT/ EDIC study cohort. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(5):780-785.
763. Esposito K, Maiorino MI, Bellastella G, Giugliano F, Romano M, Giugliano D. Determinants of
female sexual dysfunction in type 2 diabetes. Int J Impot Res. 2010;22(3):179-184.
764. Hatzichristou D, Rosen RC, Derogatis LR, et al. Recommendations for the clinical evaluation of
men and women with sexual dysfunction. J Sex Med. 2010;7(1 Pt 2):337-348.
765. Nijland EA, Weijmar Schultz WC, Nathorst-Boos J, et al. Tibolone and transdermal E2/NETA
for the treatment of female sexual dysfunction in naturally menopausal women: results of a
randomized active-controlled trial. J Sex Med. 2008;5(3):646-656.
766. Basson R, Wierman ME, van Lankveld J, Brotto L. Summary of the recommendations on sexual
dysfunctions in women. J Sex Med. 2010;7(1 Pt 2):314-326.
767. Wierman ME, Arlt W, Basson R, et al. Androgen therapy in women: a reappraisal: an Endocrine
Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(10):3489-3510.
768. Perrin NE, Davies MJ, Robertson N, Snoek FJ, Khunti K. The prevalence of diabetes-specific
emotional distress in people with Type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Diabet Med. 2017;34(11):1508-1520.
769. Mezuk B, Eaton WW, Albrecht S, Golden SH. Depression and type 2 diabetes over the lifespan:
a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(12):2383-2390.
770. Kaur G, Tee GH, Ariaratnam S, Krishnapillai AS, China K. Depression, anxiety and stress
symptoms among diabetics in Malaysia: a cross sectional study in an urban primary care
setting. BMC Fam Pract. 2013;14:69.
771. Fisher L, Glasgow RE, Strycker LA. The relationship between diabetes distress and clinical
depression with glycemic control among patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2010;33(5):1034-1036.
772. van Dooren FE, Nefs G, Schram MT, Verhey FR, Denollet J, Pouwer F. Depression and risk of
mortality in people with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One.
2013;8(3):e57058.
773. de Groot M, Shubrook JH, Hornsby WG, et al. Program ACTIVE II: Outcomes From a
Randomized, Multistate Community-Based Depression Treatment for Rural and Urban Adults
With Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2019;42(7):1185-1193.
774. Rubin R, Bierman J, Toohey B. Psyching Out Diabetes: A positive approach to your negative
emotions. Illinois, Chicago: Lowell House; 1999.
REFERENCES
775. Polonsky W. Diabetes Burnout: What to do when you can’t take it anymore. Alexandria, Virginia:
American Diabetes Association; 1999.
776. Pihlstrom BL, Michalowicz BS, Johnson NW. Periodontal diseases. Lancet. 2005;366(9499):18091820.
777. Khader YS, Dauod AS, El-Qaderi SS, Alkafajei A, Batayha WQ. Periodontal status of diabetics
compared with nondiabetics: a meta-analysis. J Diabetes Complications. 2006;20(1):59-68.
778. Campus G, Salem A, Uzzau S, Baldoni E, Tonolo G. Diabetes and periodontal disease: a casecontrol study. J Periodontol. 2005;76(3):418-425.
779. Chavarry NG, Vettore MV, Sansone C, Sheiham A. The relationship between diabetes mellitus
and destructive periodontal disease: a meta-analysis. Oral Health Prev Dent. 2009;7(2):107-127.
780. Santos Tunes R, Foss-Freitas MC, Nogueira-Filho Gda R. Impact of periodontitis on the
diabetes-related inflammatory status. J Can Dent Assoc. 2010;76:a35.
781. Raman RP, Taiyeb-Ali TB, Chan SP, Chinna K, Vaithilingam RD. Effect of nonsurgical periodontal
therapy verses oral hygiene instructions on type 2 diabetes subjects with chronic periodontitis:
a randomised clinical trial. BMC Oral Health. 2014;14:79.
782. Borgnakke WS, Ylostalo PV, Taylor GW, Genco RJ. Effect of periodontal disease on diabetes:
systematic review of epidemiologic observational evidence. J Periodontol. 2013;84(4
Suppl):S135-152.
783. Sharma P, Dietrich T, Ferro CJ, Cockwell P, Chapple IL. Association between periodontitis and
mortality in stages 3-5 chronic kidney disease: NHANES III and linked mortality study. J Clin
Periodontol. 2016;43(2):104-113.
784. Southerland JH, Moss K, Taylor GW, et al. Periodontitis and diabetes associations with
measures of atherosclerosis and CHD. Atherosclerosis. 2012;222(1):196-201.
785. Simpson TC, Weldon JC, Worthington HV, et al. Treatment of periodontal disease for glycaemic
control in people with diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015(11):Cd004714.
786. Engebretson S, Kocher T. Evidence that periodontal treatment improves diabetes outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Periodontol. 2013;40 Suppl 14:S153-163.
787. Madianos PN, Koromantzos PA. An update of the evidence on the potential impact of
periodontal therapy on diabetes outcomes. J Clin Periodontol. 2018;45(2):188-195.
788. Otomo-Corgel J, Pucher JJ, Rethman MP, Reynolds MA. State of the science: chronic
periodontitis and systemic health. J Evid Based Dent Pract. 2012;12(3 Suppl):20-28.
789. Inzucchi SE. Clinical practice. Management of hyperglycemia in the hospital setting. N Engl J
Med. 2006;355(18):1903-1911.
790. Langouche L, Vanhorebeek I, Vlasselaers D, et al. Intensive insulin therapy protects the
endothelium of critically ill patients. J Clin Invest. 2005;115(8):2277-2286.
791. Umpierrez GE, Smiley D, Hermayer K, et al. Randomized Study Comparing a Basal-Bolus With
a Basal Plus Correction Insulin Regimen for the Hospital Management of Medical and Surgical
Patients With Type 2 Diabetes. Basal Plus Trial. 2013;36(8):2169-2174.
792. Umpierrez GE, Smiley D, Zisman A, et al. Randomized Study of Basal-Bolus Insulin Therapy in
the Inpatient Management of Patients With Type 2 Diabetes (RABBIT 2 Trial). Diabetes Care.
2007;30(9):2181-2186.
793. Mendez CE, Umpierrez GE. Pharmacotherapy for Hyperglycemia in Noncritically Ill Hospitalized
Patients. Diabetes Spectrum. 2014;27(3):180-188.
794. Falciglia M, Freyberg RW, Almenoff PL, D’Alessio DA, Render ML. Hyperglycemiarelated mortality in critically ill patients varies with admission diagnosis. Crit Care Med.
2009;37(12):3001-3009.
795. Bansal V, Mottalib A, Pawar TK, et al. Inpatient diabetes management by specialized diabetes
team versus primary service team in non-critical care units: impact on 30-day readmission rate
and hospital cost. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care. 2018;6(1):e000460.
796. Wang Y J, Seggelke S, Hawkins RM, et al. IMPACT OF GLUCOSE MANAGEMENT TEAM ON
OUTCOMES OF HOSPITALIZARON IN PATIENTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES ADMITTED TO THE
MEDICAL SERVICE. Endocr Pract. 2016;22(12):1401-1405.
797. Moghissi ES, Korytkowski MT, DiNardo M, et al. American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists and American Diabetes Association consensus statement on inpatient
glycemic control. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(6):1119-1131.
REFERENCES
798. Pasquel FJ, Gomez-Huelgas R, Anzola I, et al. Predictive Value of Admission Hemoglobin A1c on
Inpatient Glycemic Control and Response to Insulin Therapy in Medicine and Surgery Patients
With Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(12):e202-203.
799. Umpierrez GE, Reyes D, Smiley D, et al. Hospital discharge algorithm based on admission HbA1c
for the management of patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(11):2934-2939.
800. Hulst AH, Plummer MP, Hollmann MW, et al. Systematic review of incretin therapy during perioperative and intensive care. Crit Care. 2018;22(1):299.
801. Perez-Belmonte LM, Gomez-Doblas JJ, Millan-Gomez M, et al. Use of Linagliptin for the
Management of Medicine Department Inpatients with Type 2 Diabetes in Real-World Clinical
Practice (Lina-Real-World Study). J Clin Med. 2018;7(9).
802. Bueno E, Benitez A, Rufinelli JV, et al. BASAL-BOLUS REGIMEN WITH INSULIN ANALOGUES
VERSUS HUMAN INSULIN IN MEDICAL PATIENTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES: A RANDOMIZED
CONTROLLED TRIAL IN LATIN AMERICA. Endocr Pract. 2015;21(7):807-813.
803. Intensive versus Conventional Glucose Control in Critically Ill Patients. New England Journal of
Medicine. 2009;360(13):1283-1297.
804. Bellolio MF, Gilmore RM, Ganti L. Insulin for glycaemic control in acute ischaemic stroke.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014(1):Cd005346.
805. Furnary AP, Gao G, Grunkemeier GL, et al. Continuous insulin infusion reduces mortality in
patients with diabetes undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2003;125(5):1007-1021.
806. Griesdale DE, de Souza RJ, van Dam RM, et al. Intensive insulin therapy and mortality among
critically ill patients: a meta-analysis including NICE-SUGAR study data. Cmaj. 2009;180(8):821-827.
807. Malmberg K. Prospective randomised study of intensive insulin treatment on long term
survival after acute myocardial infarction in patients with diabetes mellitus. DIGAMI
(Diabetes Mellitus, Insulin Glucose Infusion in Acute Myocardial Infarction) Study Group. BMJ.
1997;314(7093):1512-1515.
808. Malmberg K, Ryden L, Efendic S, et al. Randomized trial of insulin-glucose infusion followed by
subcutaneous insulin treatment in diabetic patients with acute myocardial infarction (DIGAMI
study): effects on mortality at 1 year. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;26(1):57-65.
809. Malmberg K, Ryden L, Hamsten A, Herlitz J, Waldenstrom A, Wedel H. Effects of insulin
treatment on cause-specific one-year mortality and morbidity in diabetic patients with acute
myocardial infarction. DIGAMI Study Group. Diabetes Insulin-Glucose in Acute Myocardial
Infarction. Eur Heart J. 1996;17(9):1337-1344.
810. Malmberg K, Ryden L, Wedel H, et al. Intense metabolic control by means of insulin in patients
with diabetes mellitus and acute myocardial infarction (DIGAMI 2): effects on mortality and
morbidity. Eur Heart J. 2005;26(7):650-661.
811. Malmberg KA, Efendic S, Ryden LE. Feasibility of insulin-glucose infusion in diabetic patients
with acute myocardial infarction. A report from the multicenter trial: DIGAMI. Diabetes Care.
1994;17(9):1007-1014.
812. Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive Insulin Therapy in Critically Ill Patients.
New England Journal of Medicine. 2001;345(19):1359-1367.
813. Clement S, Braithwaite SS, Magee MF, et al. Management of Diabetes and Hyperglycemia in
Hospitals. Diabetes Care. 2004;27(2):553-591.
814. George S, Dale J, Stanisstreet D. A guideline for the use of variable rate intravenous insulin
infusion in medical inpatients. Diabet Med. 2015;32(6):706-713.
815. Joint British Diabetes Societies Inpatient Care Group. Management of adults with diabetes
undergoing surgery and elective procedures: improving standards. 2011.
816. Bucerius J, Gummert JF, Walther T, et al. Impact of Diabetes Mellitus on Cardiac Surgery
Outcome. Thorac cardiovasc Surg. 2003;51(01):113-113.
817. Christiansen CL, Schurizek BA, Malling B, Knudsen L, Alberti KG, Hermansen K. Insulin
treatment of the insulin-dependent diabetic patient undergoing minor surgery.
Continuous intravenous infusion compared with subcutaneous administration. Anaesthesia.
1988;43(7):533-537.
818. DiNardo M, Donihi AC, Forte P, Gieraltowski L, Korytkowski M. Standardized glycemic
management and perioperative glycemic outcomes in patients with diabetes mellitus who
undergo same-day surgery. Endocr Pract. 2011;17(3):404-411.
REFERENCES
819. Estrada CA, Young JA, Nifong LW, Chitwood WR, Jr. Outcomes and perioperative
hyperglycemia in patients with or without diabetes mellitus undergoing coronary artery bypass
grafting. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75(5):1392-1399.
820. Hemmerling TM, Schmid MC, Schmidt J, Kern S, Jacobi KE. Comparison of a continuous glucoseinsulin-potassium infusion versus intermittent bolus application of insulin on perioperative
glucose control and hormone status in insulin-treated type 2 diabetics. J Clin Anesth.
2001;13(4):293-300.
821. Lipshutz AK, Gropper MA. Perioperative glycemic control: an evidence-based review.
Anesthesiology. 2009;110(2):408-421.
822. Ouattara A, Lecomte P, Le Manach Y, et al. Poor intraoperative blood glucose control is
associated with a worsened hospital outcome after cardiac surgery in diabetic patients.
Anesthesiology. 2005;103(4):687-694.
823. Raucoules-AimÉ M, Lugrin D, Boussofara M, Gastaud P, Dolisi C, Grimaud D. Intraoperative
glycaemic control in non-insulin-dependent and insulin-dependent diabetes. BJA: British
Journal of Anaesthesia. 1994;73(4):443-449.
824. Subramaniam B, Panzica PJ, Novack V, et al. Continuous perioperative insulin infusion
decreases major cardiovascular events in patients undergoing vascular surgery: a prospective,
randomized trial. Anesthesiology. 2009;110(5):970-977.
825. Szekely A, Levin J, Miao Y, et al. Impact of hyperglycemia on perioperative mortality after
coronary artery bypass graft surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142(2):430-437.e431.
826. Thomas MC, Mathew TH, Russ GR, Rao MM, Moran J. Early peri-operative glycaemic control
and allograft rejection in patients with diabetes mellitus: a pilot study. Transplantation.
2001;72(7):1321-1324.
827. Gandhi GY, Nuttall GA, Abel MD, et al. Intensive intraoperative insulin therapy versus
conventional glucose management during cardiac surgery: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med.
2007;146(4):233-243.
828. Kristensen SD, Knuuti J, Saraste A, et al. 2014 ESC/ESA Guidelines on non-cardiac surgery:
cardiovascular assessment and management: The Joint Task Force on non-cardiac surgery:
cardiovascular assessment and management of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and
the European Society of Anaesthesiology (ESA). Eur Heart J. 2014;35(35):2383-2431.
829. Umpierrez GE, Smiley D, Jacobs S, et al. Randomized Study of Basal-Bolus Insulin Therapy in the
Inpatient Management of Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Undergoing General Surgery (RABBIT
2 Surgery). Diabetes Care. 2011;34(2):256-261.
830. Korytkowski MT, Salata RJ, Koerbel GL, et al. Insulin therapy and glycemic control in
hospitalized patients with diabetes during enteral nutrition therapy: a randomized controlled
clinical trial. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(4):594-596.
831. Laesser CI, Cumming P, Reber E, Stanga Z, Muka T, Bally L. Management of Glucose Control
in Noncritically Ill, Hospitalized Patients Receiving Parenteral and/or Enteral Nutrition: A
Systematic Review. J Clin Med. 2019;8(7).
832. Olveira G, Abuin J, Lopez R, et al. Regular insulin added to total parenteral nutrition vs
subcutaneous glargine in non-critically ill diabetic inpatients, a multicenter randomized clinical
trial: INSUPAR trial. Clin Nutr. 2020;39(2):388-394.
833. Lakhani OJ, Kumar S, Tripathi S, Desai M, Seth C. Comparison of Two Protocols in the
Management of Glucocorticoid-induced Hyperglycemia among Hospitalized Patients. Indian J
Endocrinol Metab. 2017;21(6):836-844.
834. Tatalovic M, Lehmann R, Cheetham M, Nowak A, Battegay E, Rampini SK. Management of
hyperglycaemia in persons with non-insulin-dependent type 2 diabetes mellitus who are
started on systemic glucocorticoid therapy: a systematic review. BMJ Open. 2019;9(5):e028914.
835. Cook CB, Beer KA, Seifert KM, Boyle ME, Mackey PA, Castro JC. Transitioning insulin pump
therapy from the outpatient to the inpatient setting: a review of 6 years’ experience with 253
cases. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2012;6(5):995-1002.
836. Thompson B, Korytkowski M, Klonoff DC, Cook CB. Consensus Statement on Use of Continuous
Subcutaneous Insulin Infusion Therapy in the Hospital. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2018;12(4):880-889.
837. Chernausek SD, Arslanian S, Caprio S, et al. Relationship Between Parental Diabetes and
Presentation of Metabolic and Glycemic Function in Youth With Type 2 Diabetes: Baseline
Findings From the TODAY Trial. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(1):110-117.
REFERENCES
838. Dabelea D, Mayer-Davis EJ, Lamichhane AP, et al. Association of intrauterine exposure to
maternal diabetes and obesity with type 2 diabetes in youth: the SEARCH Case-Control Study.
Diabetes Care. 2008;31(7):1422-1426.
839. Copeland KC, Zeitler P, Geffner M, et al. Characteristics of adolescents and youth with recentonset type 2 diabetes: the TODAY cohort at baseline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96(1):159-167.
840. Barrett T, Jalaludin MY, Turan S, Hafez M, Shehadeh N. Rapid progression of type 2 diabetes
and related complications in children and young people-A literature review. Pediatr Diabetes.
2020;21(2):158-172.
841. Hannon TS, Arslanian SA. The changing face of diabetes in youth: lessons learned from studies
of type 2 diabetes. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015;1353:113-137.
842. TODAY Study Group. Effects of metformin, metformin plus rosiglitazone, and metformin plus
lifestyle on insulin sensitivity and beta-cell function in TODAY. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(6):17491757.
843. Dabelea D, Mayer-Davis EJ, Andrews JS, et al. Clinical evolution of beta cell function in youth
with diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study. Diabetologia. 2012;55(12):3359-3368.
844. Kahn SE, Lachin JM, Zinman B, et al. Effects of rosiglitazone, glyburide, and metformin on betacell function and insulin sensitivity in ADOPT. Diabetes. 2011;60(5):1552-1560.
845. Matthews DR, Cull CA, Stratton IM, Holman RR, Turner RC. UKPDS 26: Sulphonylurea failure in
non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients over six years. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Group. Diabet Med. 1998;15(4):297-303.
846. Burns SF, Bacha F, Lee SJ, Tfayli H, Gungor N, Arslanian SA. Declining beta-cell function relative
to insulin sensitivity with escalating OGTT 2-h glucose concentrations in the nondiabetic
through the diabetic range in overweight youth. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(9):2033-2040.
847. Giannini C, Weiss R, Cali A, et al. Evidence for early defects in insulin sensitivity and secretion
before the onset of glucose dysregulation in obese youths: a longitudinal study. Diabetes.
2012;61(3):606-614.
848. Tfayli H, Lee S, Arslanian S. Declining beta-cell function relative to insulin sensitivity with
increasing fasting glucose levels in the nondiabetic range in children. Diabetes Care.
2010;33(9):2024-2030.
849. RISE Consortium. Metabolic Contrasts Between Youth and Adults With Impaired Glucose
Tolerance or Recently Diagnosed Type 2 Diabetes: II. Observations Using the Oral Glucose
Tolerance Test. Diabetes Care. 2018;41(8):1707-1716.
850. TODAY Study Group. Rapid rise in hypertension and nephropathy in youth with type 2 diabetes:
the TODAY clinical trial. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(6):1735-1741.
851. Dart AB, Sellers EA, Martens PJ, Rigatto C, Brownell MD, Dean HJ. High burden of kidney disease
in youth-onset type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(6):1265-1271.
852. Eppens MC, Craig ME, Cusumano J, et al. Prevalence of diabetes complications in adolescents
with type 2 compared with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(6):1300-1306.
853. Mayer-Davis EJ, Davis C, Saadine J, et al. Diabetic retinopathy in the SEARCH for Diabetes in
Youth Cohort: a pilot study. Diabet Med. 2012;29(9):1148-1152.
854. Pavkov ME, Bennett PH, Knowler WC, Krakoff J, Sievers ML, Nelson RG. Effect of youth-onset
type 2 diabetes mellitus on incidence of end-stage renal disease and mortality in young and
middle-aged Pima Indians. JAMA. 2006;296(4):421-426.
855. Hanas R, Donaghue KC, Klingensmith G, Swift PG. ISPAD clinical practice consensus guidelines
2009 compendium. Introduction. Pediatr Diabetes. 2009;10 Suppl 12:1-2.
856. Rosenbloom AL. Obesity, Insulin Resistance, β-Cell Autoimmunity, and the Changing Clinical
Epidemiology of Childhood Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(10):2954-2956.
857. Reinehr T, Schober E, Wiegand S, Thon A, Holl R. Beta-cell autoantibodies in children with type
2 diabetes mellitus: subgroup or misclassification? Arch Dis Child. 2006;91(6):473-477.
858. Umpaichitra V, Banerji MA, Castells S. Autoantibodies in children with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2002;15 Suppl 1:525-530.
859. American Diabetes Association. Type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents. Pediatrics.
2000;105(3 Pt 1):671-680.
860. American Diabetes Association. Type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents. Diabetes Care.
2000;23(3):381-389.
REFERENCES
861. DiMeglio LA, Acerini CL, Codner E, et al. ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2018:
Glycemic control targets and glucose monitoring for children, adolescents, and young adults
with diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes. 2018;19 Suppl 27:105-114.
862. Acerini C, Craig ME, de Beaufort C, Maahs DM, Hanas R. Introduction to ISPAD Clinical Practice
Consensus Guidelines 2014 Compendium. Pediatr Diabetes. 2014;15 Suppl 20:1-3.
863. Lawrence JM, Standiford DA, Loots B, et al. Prevalence and correlates of depressed
mood among youth with diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study. Pediatrics.
2006;117(4):1348-1358.
864. Wilfley D, Berkowitz R, Goebel-Fabbri A, et al. Binge eating, mood, and quality of life in youth
with type 2 diabetes: baseline data from the today study. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(4):858-860.
865. Zeitler P, Hirst K, Pyle L, et al. A clinical trial to maintain glycemic control in youth with type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(24):2247-2256.
866. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA approves new treatment for pediatric patients with
type 2 diabetes. Accessed 20 September 2019. Available from http://www.fda.gov/newsevents/press-announcements/fda-approves- new-treatment-pediatric-patients-type-2-diabetes.
867. Arslanian S, Bacha F, Grey M, Marcus MD, White NH, Zeitler P. Evaluation and Management of
Youth-Onset Type 2 Diabetes: A Position Statement by the American Diabetes Association.
Diabetes Care. 2018;41(12):2648-2668.
868. Tamborlane WV, Barrientos-Perez M, Fainberg U, et al. Liraglutide in Children and Adolescents
with Type 2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(7):637-646.
869. Zeitler P, Arslanian S, Fu J, et al. ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2018: Type 2
diabetes mellitus in youth. Pediatr Diabetes. 2018;19 Suppl 27:28-46.
870. Statistica. Share of population older than 65 years in Malaysia from 2015 to 2019. Available at
https://www.statista.com/statistics/713529/malaysia-aging-population/.
871. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al. Intensive blood glucose control and vascular outcomes in
patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(24):2560-2572.
872. Raz I, Ceriello A, Wilson PW, et al. Post Hoc Subgroup Analysis of the HEART2D Trial
Demonstrates Lower Cardiovascular Risk in Older Patients Targeting Postprandial Versus
Fasting/Premeal Glycemia. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(7):1511-1513.
873. Rizzo MR, Marfella R, Barbieri M, et al. Relationships between daily acute glucose
fluctuations and cognitive performance among aged type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes Care.
2010;33(10):2169-2174.
874. Miller ME, Bonds DE, Gerstein HC, et al. The effects of baseline characteristics, glycaemia
treatment approach, and glycated haemoglobin concentration on the risk of severe
hypoglycaemia: post hoc epidemiological analysis of the ACCORD study. BMJ. 2010;340:b5444.
875. Bruce DG, Davis WA, Casey GP, et al. Severe hypoglycaemia and cognitive impairment in older
patients with diabetes: the Fremantle Diabetes Study. Diabetologia. 2009;52(9):1808-1815.
876. Meneilly GS, Elliott T. Metabolic alterations in middle-aged and elderly obese patients with
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 1999;22(1):112-118.
877. Shorr RI, Ray WA, Daugherty JR, Griffin MR. Incidence and risk factors for serious hypoglycemia
in older persons using insulin or sulfonylureas. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157(15):1681-1686.
878. World Health Organization. Essential medicines and health products - WHO Model
Lists of essential medicines. Available at https://www.who.int/medicines/publications/
essentialmedicines/en/.
879. International Diabetes Federation. Managing older people with type 2 diabetes global
guidelines. 2013.
880. Migdal A, Yarandi SS, Smiley D, Umpierrez GE. Update on diabetes in the elderly and in nursing
home residents. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2011;12(9):627-632.e622.
881. Op den Kamp CM, Langen RC, Haegens A, Schols AM. Muscle atrophy in cachexia: can dietary
protein tip the balance? Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2009;12(6):611-616.
882. Villareal DT, Aguirre L, Gurney AB, et al. Aerobic or Resistance Exercise, or Both, in Dieting
Obese Older Adults. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(20):1943-1955.
883. Villareal DT, Chode S, Parimi N, et al. Weight loss, exercise, or both and physical function in
obese older adults. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(13):1218-1229.
REFERENCES
884. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. “Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res. 1975;12(3):189-198.
885. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Chen P, Ganguli M. The Mini-Cog as a screen for dementia: validation in a
population-based sample. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51(10):1451-1454.
886. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bedirian V, et al. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief
screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53(4):695-699.
887. Castro-Rodriguez M, Carnicero JA, Garcia-Garcia FJ, et al. Frailty as a Major Factor in the
Increased Risk of Death and Disability in Older People With Diabetes. J Am Med Dir Assoc.
2016;17(10):949-955.
888. Salti I, Benard E, Detournay B, et al. A population-based study of diabetes and its
characteristics during the fasting month of Ramadan in 13 countries: results of the
epidemiology of diabetes and Ramadan 1422/2001 (EPIDIAR) study. Diabetes Care.
2004;27(10):2306-2311.
889. Al-Arouj M, Assaad-Khalil S, Buse J, et al. Recommendations for Management of Diabetes
During Ramadan. Update 2010. 2010;33(8):1895-1902.
890. International Diabetes Federation (IDF) in collaboration with the Diabetes and Ramadan (DAR)
International Alliance. Diabetes and Ramadan: Practical Guidelines. 2016.
891. Hassanein M, Al-Arouj M, Hamdy O, et al. Diabetes and Ramadan: Practical guidelines. Diabetes
Research and Clinical Practice. 2017;126:303-316.
892. Bashir M, Pathan MF, Raza S, et al. Role of oral hypoglycemic agents in the management of
type 2 diabetes mellitus during Ramadan. Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism.
2012;16(4):503-507.
893. Benaji B, Mounib N, Roky R, et al. Diabetes and Ramadan: review of the literature. Diabetes Res
Clin Pract. 2006;73(2):117-125.
894. Bravis V, Hui E, Salih S, Mehar S, Hassanein M, Devendra D. Ramadan Education and Awareness
in Diabetes (READ) programme for Muslims with Type 2 diabetes who fast during Ramadan.
Diabet Med. 2010;27(3):327-331.
895. Pathan MF, Sahay RK, Zargar AH, et al. South Asian Consensus Guideline: Use of insulin in
diabetes during Ramadan. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2012;16(4):499-502.
896. Ibrahim MA. Managing diabetes during Ramadan. Diabetes Voice. 2007;52(2):19-22.
897. Malaysian Health Technology Assessement Section, Ministry of Health Malaysia. Nutritional
therapy as a complement for diabetes and hypertension. 2013.
898. Karamat MA, Syed A, Hanif W. Review of diabetes management and guidelines during
Ramadan. J R Soc Med. 2010;103(4):139-147.
899. Ali S, Davies MJ, Brady EM, et al. Guidelines for managing diabetes in Ramadan. Diabet Med.
2016;33(10):1315-1329.
900. Lee SW, Lee JY, Tan CS, Wong CP. Strategies to Make Ramadan Fasting Safer in Type 2
Diabetics: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials
and Observational Studies. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95(2):e2457.
901. Khattab M, Mahmoud K, Shaltout I. Effect of Vildagliptin Versus Sulfonylurea in Muslim
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Fasting During Ramadan in Egypt: Results from VIRTUE Study.
Diabetes Ther. 2016;7(3):551-560.
902. Nor Azmi K, Wan Juani WS, Norlaila N, et al. Assessment of dehydration parameters with
dapaglifozin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus during Ramadan fasting month (ePoster
#757). 51st Annual Meeting of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes 2015;
Available at: http://www. easdvirtualmeeting.org/resources/assessment-of-dehydrationparameters-with-dapaglifozinin- patients-with-type-2-diabetes-mellitus-during-ramadanfasting-month--3. Accessed 29 March 2016.
903. Beshyah SA, Chatterjee S, Davies MJ. Use of SGL T2 inhibitors during Ramadan: a survery of
physicians’ views and practical guidance. Br J Diabetes 2016;16:20-24.
904. Hassanein M, Echtay A, Hassoun A, et al. Tolerability of canagliflozin in patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus fasting during Ramadan: Results of the Canagliflozin in Ramadan Tolerance
Observational Study (CRATOS). Int J Clin Pract. 2017;71(10).
REFERENCES
905. Wan Seman WJ, Kori N, Rajoo S, et al. Switching from sulphonylurea to a sodium-glucose
cotransporter2 inhibitor in the fasting month of Ramadan is associated with a reduction in
hypoglycaemia. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2016;18(6):628-632.
906. Azar ST, Echtay A, Wan Bebakar WM, et al. Efficacy and safety of liraglutide compared to
sulphonylurea during Ramadan in patients with type 2 diabetes (LIRA-Ramadan): a randomized
trial. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2016;18(10):1025-1033.
907. Benbarka MM, Khalil AB, Beshyah SA, Marjei S, Awad SA. Insulin pump therapy in Moslem
patients with type 1 diabetes during Ramadan fasting: an observational report. Diabetes
Technol Ther. 2010;12(4):287-290.
908. Bin-Abbas BS. Insulin pump therapy during Ramadan fasting in type 1 diabetic adolescents. Ann
Saudi Med. 2008;28(4):305-306.
909. Hawli YM, Zantout MS, Azar ST. Adjusting the basal insulin regimen of patients with type 1
diabetes mellitus receiving insulin pump therapy during the Ramadan fast: A case series in
adolescents and adults. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp. 2009;70(1):29-34.
910. Hui E, Devendra D. Diabetes and fasting during Ramadan. Diabetes/Metabolism Research and
Reviews. 2010;26(8):606-610.
911. Ali MK, Bullard KM, Saydah S, Imperatore G, Gregg EW. Cardiovascular and renal burdens of
prediabetes in the USA: analysis of data from serial cross-sectional surveys, 1988-2014. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2018;6(5):392-403.
912. Huang Y, Cai X, Mai W, Li M, Hu Y. Association between prediabetes and risk of cardiovascular
disease and all cause mortality: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2016;355:i5953.
913. Eriksson KF, Lindgarde F. Prevention of type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus by diet
and physical exercise. The 6-year Malmo feasibility study. Diabetologia. 1991;34(12):891-898.
914. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes
with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(6):393-403.
915. Lindstrom J, Louheranta A, Mannelin M, et al. The Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study
(DPS): Lifestyle intervention and 3-year results on diet and physical activity. Diabetes Care.
2003;26(12):3230-3236.
916. Pan XR, Li GW, Hu YH, et al. Effects of diet and exercise in preventing NIDDM in people
with impaired glucose tolerance. The Da Qing IGT and Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care.
1997;20(4):537-544.
917. Hemmingsen B, Gimenez-Perez G, Mauricio D, Roque IFM, Metzendorf MI, Richter B. Diet,
physical activity or both for prevention or delay of type 2 diabetes mellitus and its associated
complications in people at increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2017;12:Cd003054.
918. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Type 2 diabetes: prevention in people
at high risk. 2017. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph38.
919. Bian RR, Piatt GA, Sen A, et al. The Effect of Technology-Mediated Diabetes Prevention
Interventions on Weight: A Meta-Analysis. J Med Internet Res. 2017;19(3):e76.
920. Merlotti C, Morabito A, Pontiroli AE. Prevention of type 2 diabetes; a systematic review and
meta-analysis of different intervention strategies. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2014;16(8):719-727.
921. Lee PC, Tan HC, Pasupathy S, et al. Effectiveness of bariatric surgery in diabetes prevention in
high-risk Asian individuals. Singapore Med J. 2018;59(9):472-475.
922. Ramachandran A, Snehalatha C, Mary S, Mukesh B, Bhaskar AD, Vijay V. The Indian Diabetes
Prevention Programme shows that lifestyle modification and metformin prevent type 2
diabetes in Asian Indian subjects with impaired glucose tolerance (IDPP-1). Diabetologia.
2006;49(2):289-297.
923. Aroda VR, Christophi CA, Edelstein SL, et al. The effect of lifestyle intervention and metformin
on preventing or delaying diabetes among women with and without gestational diabetes:
the Diabetes Prevention Program outcomes study 10-year follow-up. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2015;100(4):1646-1653.
924. Chatterton H, Younger T, Fischer A, Khunti K. Risk identification and interventions to prevent
type 2 diabetes in adults at high risk: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2012;345:e4624.
925. Faerch K, Amadid H, Nielsen LB, et al. Protocol for a randomised controlled trial of the effect
of dapagliflozin, metformin and exercise on glycaemic variability, body composition and
cardiovascular risk in prediabetes (the PRE-D Trial). BMJ Open. 2017;7(5):e013802.
REFERENCES
926. Hemmingsen B, Sonne DP, Metzendorf MI, Richter B. Dipeptidyl-peptidase (DPP)-4 inhibitors
and glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 analogues for prevention or delay of type 2 diabetes
mellitus and its associated complications in people at increased risk for the development of
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;5:Cd012204.
927. Moelands SVL, Lucassen PLBJ, Akkermans RP, De Grauw WJC, Van de Laar FA. Alphaglucosidase inhibitors for prevention or delay of type 2 diabetes mellitus and its associated
complications in people at increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2018, Issue 12. Art. No.: CD005061. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.
CD005061.pub3.
928. Inzucchi SE, Viscoli CM, Young LH, et al. Pioglitazone Prevents Diabetes in Patients With Insulin
Resistance and Cerebrovascular Disease. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(10):1684-1692.
929. Torgerson JS, Hauptman J, Boldrin MN, Sjostrom L. XENical in the prevention of diabetes in
obese subjects (XENDOS) study: a randomized study of orlistat as an adjunct to lifestyle changes
for the prevention of type 2 diabetes in obese patients. Diabetes Care. 2004;27(1):155-161.
930. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. Complementary, Alternative
or Integrative Health: what’s in a name? Available at https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/
complementary-alternative-or-integrative-health-whats-in-a-name.
931. Ernst E. Complementary medicine: its hidden risks. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(8):1486-1488.
932. Schwingshackl L, Lampousi AM, Portillo MP, Romaguera D, Hoffmann G, Boeing H. Olive oil in
the prevention and management of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and metaanalysis of cohort studies and intervention trials. Nutr Diabetes. 2017;7(4):e262.
933. Poolsup N, Suksomboon N, Plordplong N. Effect of vitamin D supplementation on insulin
resistance and glycaemic control in prediabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabet
Med. 2016;33(3):290-299.
934. Xu R, Zhang S, Tao A, Chen G, Zhang M. Influence of Vitamin E Supplementation on Glycaemic
Control: A Meta-Analysis of Randomised Controlled Trials. PLOS ONE. 2014;9(4):e95008.
935. Allen RW, Schwartzman E, Baker WL, Coleman CI, Phung OJ. Cinnamon use in type 2 diabetes:
an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Fam Med. 2013;11(5):452-459.
936. Poolsup N, Suksomboon N, Kurnianta PDM, Deawjaroen K. Effects of curcumin on glycemic
control and lipid profile in prediabetes and type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2019;14(4):e0215840.
937. National Pharmaceutical Control Bureau. Malaysian Guidelines for the Reporting & Monitoring.
2002; http://portal.bpfk.gov.my/index.cfm?menuid=27&parentid=16, April 2015.
938. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Nutrition Department. Available at http://nutrition.moh.gov.my/
poster/. Accessed April 2020.
939. Tee ES, Mohd Ismail N, Mohd Nasir A, et al. Nutrient Composition of Malaysian Foods. 4th ed.
Kuala Lumpur: Institute for Medical Research; 1997.
940. Suzana, S., Nik Shanita, S., Zahara, A.M. & Hasnah, H. 2015. Atlas of Food Exchanges & Portion
Sizes. 3rd ed. Kuala Lumpur: MDC Publisher.
941. Min JE, Green DB, Kim L. Calories and sugars in boba milk tea: implications for obesity risk in
Asian Pacific Islanders. Food Sci Nutr. 2017;5(1):38-45.
942. Shanita SN, Hasnah H, Khoo C. Amylose and amylopectin in selected Malaysian foods and its
relationship to glycemic index. Sains Malaysiana. 2011;40(8):865-870.
943. Atkinson FS, Foster-Powell K, Brand-Miller JC. International tables of glycemic index and
glycemic load values: 2008. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(12):2281-2283.
944. Foster-Powell K, Holt SH, Brand-Miller JC. International table of glycemic index and glycemic
load values: 2002. Am J Clin Nutr. 2002;76(1):5-56.
945. Robert SD, Ismail AA, Winn T, Wolever TM. Glycemic index of common Malaysian fruits. Asia Pac
J Clin Nutr. 2008;17(1):35-39.
946. Yusof BN, Abd Talib R, Karim NA, Kamarudin NA, Arshad F. Glycaemic index of four
commercially available breads in Malaysia. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 2009;60(6):487-496.
947. American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Progression models in resistance training
for healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41(3):687-708.
REFERENCES
948. White WB, Bakris GL, Bergenstal RM, et al. EXamination of cArdiovascular outcoMes with
alogliptIN versus standard of carE in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and acute coronary
syndrome (EXAMINE): a cardiovascular safety study of the dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor
alogliptin in patients with type 2 diabetes with acute coronary syndrome. Am Heart J.
2011;162(4):620-626.e621.
949. Eslam M, Sarin SK, Wong VW-S, et al. The Asian Pacific Association for the Study of the Liver
clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of metabolic associated fatty
liver disease. Hepatol Int 2020. DOI: 10.1007/s12072-020-10094-2.
950. Zannad F, Ferreiro JP, Pocock SJ, et al. Consistent effects with SGL T2 inhibitors in HFrEF in
meta-analysis. Lancet 2020;396:819-829.
951. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al. Cardiovascular and renal outcomes with empagliflozin in
heart failure. N Eng J Med 2020;383:1413-1424.
952. Cannon CP, Pratley R, Dogogo-Jack S, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes with Ertugliflozin in Type
2 Diabetes. N Engl J Med 2020; 383:1425-1435.
953. Pan A, Wang Y, Talaei M, Hu FB. Relation of smoking with total mortality and cardiovascular
events among patients with diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis and systematic review.
Circulation. 2015;10:1795–804.
954. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Anker SD, et al. Effect of Finerenone on Chronic Kidney Disease
Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes. N Eng J Med 2020;383(23):2219-2229.
955. Heerspink HJL, Stefánsson BV, Correa-Rotter R, et al. Dapagliflozin in Patients with Chronic
Kidney Disease. N Eng J Med 2020;383(15):1436-1446.
956. de Boer IH, Caramori ML, Chan JCN, et al. KDIGO 2020 Clinical Practice Guideline for Diabetes
Management in Chronic Kidney Disease. Kidney International. 2020;98(4):S1-S115.
957. World Health Organization. Tobacco Fact Sheet 2020.
Note: References 949-957 were added into the completed CPG as latest evidence published.

C
M
Y
CM
MY
CY
CMY
K
210112_MEMS_T2DM CPG_6th-COVER_OL.pdf 1 12/01/2021 1:14 PM